Aluminum is a high-density fuel, [83.8 MJ/liter][0], though a little
lower specific energy than, say, diesel fuel --- only 31 MJ/kg instead
of 46 MJ/kg; but diesel is only 38.6 MJ/liter.  That volumetric
density is comparable to graphite (72.9 MJ/liter) and, in that table,
exceeded only by beryllium (125.1 MJ/liter) and boron (137.8
MJ/liter).  (I'm guessing anthracite is basically equivalent to
graphite.)

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density

All three of these materials (aluminum, beryllium, and boron) burn to
solid oxides rather than producing gas emissions.  In this context
it's interesting to note that aluminum can be burned in aluminum-air
fuel cells, typically at about 25% efficiency (comparable to that of
heat engines), and that scrap aluminum is readily available; retail
scrap buyers buy it at AR$100/kg from *cartoneros*, and at AR$172/US$,
that's US$0.58/kg or US$0.019/MJ.  This price is comparable to other
fuels; crude oil is currently US$72/bbl, which works out to
US$0.012/MJ at [1700 kWh or 5.8 million BTU per barrel][1], and retail
refined fuel prices are often twice that.  The US$0.04/kWh that is
typical on the wholesale electrical market works out to US$0.011/MJ,
though current solar energy costs one fourth of that, and retail
prices are commonly ten times that.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barrel_of_oil_equivalent

Practical aluminum-air batteries can be made from very simple,
inexpensive materials like table salt or potassa, carbon black,
nickel, water, and paper, and they can tolerate the impurities that
are common in scrap aluminum.  More philosophical aluminum-air
batteries are more efficient.

So you could very reasonably buy scrap aluminum as a fuel for when
grid power is unavailable, such as for aviation or submarines.
