[Methylsulfonylmethane][0], a nontoxic useless dietary supplement the
FDA deems “generally recognized as safe”, melts at 109° and can
reportedly dissolve [aluminum trichloride][1], from which a new paper
reports that aluminum metal can be electrolytically deposited under an
anhydrous argon atmosphere in a glove box (I think the paper said at
140°).  (Aluminum trichloride alone reportedly sublimates at 182.7°,
so some kind of solvent is needed.)

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methylsulfonylmethane
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminium_chloride

Aluminum trichloride is itself relatively safe; [PubChem says it’s in
antiperspirants at up to 15% concentration][4], though it “may cause
severe irritation to eyes” and is “toxic by ingestion” (hexahydrate
LD₅₀: 3311 mg/kg rat (oral); anhydrous 380 mg/kg).  A tricky thing is
that it’s maybe best to consider the anhydrous form as a separate
compound from the hexahydrate — if you heat the hexahydrate
((Al(H₂O)₆)Cl₃)), it doesn’t dehydrate to the anhydrous form, but
rather releases muriatic acid and forms alumina at 100°!  The Merck
Index says, “Fumes in air, strong odor of HCl; when heated in small
quantities volatilizes without melting. Combines with water with
explosive violence and liberation of much heat.”

[4]: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Aluminum-chloride

It’s normally produced from aluminum metal, as explained in [US patent
3,343,911][2], though [US patent 3,760,066 documents a process for
producing it from chlorine, carbon, and alumina at 800°–1000°][3],
part of the patent office’s classification “C01F7/60 - Preparation of
anhydrous aluminium chloride from oxygen-containing aluminium
compounds”.

[2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US3343911A/en
[3]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US3760066A/en

At the risk of making a fool of myself by trivializing a patent
classification with 16 patents in it (all expired: 01919, 01923,
01925, 01926, 01927, 01928, 01932, 01964, 01971, 01973, 01975, 01977,
01978, 01982, 01990, and 02004), this reaction seems like it would be
pretty straightforward:

    2 Al(OH)₃ + 6 HCl → (Al(H₂O)₆)Cl₃ + AlCl₃

That is, if you react dry aluminum hydroxide with anhydrous muriatic
acid, you should get a 1:1 molar ratio of the hexahydrate and the
anhydrous, which you then must separate.  Without using water!  Worse,
you probably don’t really have this neat separation of water-complexed
aluminum ions from non-complexed ones; I think you’ll get polymeric
[aluminum chlorohydrate][5].

[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminium_chlorohydrate

But I bet that if you heat up the mixture to drive off the HCl you’ll
end up with a mix of anhydrous aluminum chloride and alumina, and I
bet the alumina is insoluble in methylsulfonylmethane.

This is particularly interesting because purified Al(OH)₃ is the
result of the [Bayer process][6] by which aluminum is electrowon
today — but by dissolving alumina in cryolite, rather than aluminum
chloride in methylsulfonylmethane.  Crudely we should expect this
process to be cheaper because it runs at such a low temperature.
Could this be a new economic route to aluminum refining?

[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayer_process

It would be even more exciting if it turned out to be possible to do
the same trick with, for example, magnesium chlorate, magnesium
formate, magnesium perchlorate, or titanium tetrachloride.

(Thanks to Mina for help with the calculations!)