Comment on <https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29151741>.

“The cost of China’s new nuclear ambition has been estimated at US$440
billion.”  But it doesn’t say how much power that is, just that it’s
150 new reactors, so it’s about US$3B per reactor.
<https://archive.md/A5B6S> shows that the article didn’t say how much
power it was 9 hours ago either.  So, is this 15 GW, 150 GW, or 1500
GW?

PV modules are about US$0.2/Wp, so if it were PV panels, US$440B would
buy them 2.2 terawatts peak.  At an average capacity factor of 20%
(though, as pfdietz points out, most new utility-scale solar has
single-axis tracking, which pushes it to 30%) that would be 440 GW,
but China’s historical PV capacity factor has been terrible, more like
12% IIRC (maybe due to a Chinese version of the irrational
misregulation robomartin documents in California in
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29155094>).  12% would make it
more like 260 GW.  But a PV power plant includes things that aren’t
panels; balance of plant (inverter, wiring, grid connection,
monitoring, mounting, security) is typically roughly equal to the
module cost.  So it would be more like 130 GW.  (Total costs of
utility-scale solar in the US are about twice that in China
<https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Articles/2017/Jul/Bonn-Uni-Lecture--True-costs-of-renewables.pdf?la=en&hash=B7DD1720455A1ED042094C007D8B8C74F274AAFC>
at about US$0.89/Wp according to pfdietz
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29155644>.

In the US, nuclear plants cost about US$8/We.  If China’s program was
at the same cost, it would provide 55 GW.  If it was closer to the
cost of US nuclear plants in the 01970s about US$1/We
(and if the US$440B number is correct), it would
provide 440 GW.

The threads at
<https://birdsite.xanny.family/pretentiouswhat/status/1293961095892279296>
and
<https://birdsite.xanny.family/pretentiouswhat/status/1318838054891573249#m>
provide some more context, suggesting that the “HPR1000, aka Hualong
One 华龙一号”, is the reactor being used at these 150 sites.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2095809916301515>
says the HPR1000 is 3.050 GW thermal, 1.070 GW electric, net. (See
also
<https://www.ukhpr1000.co.uk/the-uk-hpr1000-technology/hpr1000-design/>
and <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hualong_One>.)  So 150 of them would
produce 161 GW electric, which (if that’s US$440B) would put the cost
around US$3/We, about twice the cost of the same generation capacity
via PV with single-axis tracking, not including any cost of storage.
But maybe that’s 150 *power plants*, each with nuclear reactors, not
150 *nuclear reactors*?
