I thought this stuff was just propylene glycol, but it isn’t.  It’s
relatively cheap (US$3/kg) and so I’m curious about its merits as a
coolant.  I’m guessing its solvent properties are similar to those of
propylene glycol.

Of course it’s miscible with water.

Dow says the pour point is -39°, it supercools, its viscosity drops
from 75 centipoise at 25° to 10.9 centipoise at 60°, it boils
(“distillation range”) at 228–236°, its vapor pressure at 25° is 2.1
Pa, its flashpoint is 124°, and its specific heat is 2.18 J/g/K.  The
technical data sheet touts its “low toxicity”.  So far so good.  Its
heat of formation is -628 kJ/mol, but at 134.2 g/mol I’m not sure that
means it’s a bad fuel.  Thermo Fisher gives its flashpoint as 138°,
its autoignition temperature as 310°, and its orl-rat LD₅₀ as *14850
mg/kg*; even more astonishing, its LC₅₀ for freshwater fish is “>5000
mg/ℓ, 24h”.  So unless they’re confusing it with propylene glycol it’s
about as toxic as water.

[Perfumers describe it][0] as “virtually odorless with a
slight-ethereal-green solvent note.”  [Monument][1] says it’s “far
less hygroscopic than other common glycols” and mentions its use as a
coolant.  [Shell][2] says contact with copper, copper alloys, and zinc
must be prevented and that it is not hazardous.  [The National
Toxicology Program][3] ([paper][4]) agrees, but notes that giving rats
drinking water with 40000 ppm (4%) of it killed them with kidney
disease within two years, but the 2% group was fine.

[0]: https://www.perfumersworld.com/view.php?pro_id=0ZW00165
[1]: https://monumentchemical.com/uploads/files/TDS/DPG%20-%20TDS.pdf
[2]: https://www.shell.com/business-customers/chemicals/our-products/propylene-glycols/_jcr_content/par/tabbedcontent/tab_372273154/textimage.stream/1576570677691/15e72c5350e00038d2a9f003dcd59a8f7284db38/tds-dpg-updated-december-2019.pdf
[3]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15213767/
[4]: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/publications/reports/tr/500s/tr511/index.html
