It’s relatively straightforward and doesn’t take much force to bend a
shape precisely out of wire, for example copper or steel wire; this
can even be a complex three-dimensional shape, although you have to
take into account springback and work-hardening.  However, unless the
wire is very thick (which makes it harder to bend) the resulting
object is fairly weak unless the wires are then twisted together,
which may not always be feasible.  If you weld adjacent wires
together, you can get a fairly solid structure, but this both distorts
the overall structure as the welds cool and introduces surface
positioning error locally due to surface tension.

Electrodeposition is an interesting alternative to welding in this
context.  It’s a terrible alternative to welding in the usual
contexts, because material deposition at any given position is very
slow, and you get almost no penetration into joints.  But in the case
of a wireframe structure, the “joints” may initially have only grazing
contact or no contact at all, and it’s only necessary to deposit a
thickness of material comparable to the thickness of the original wire
to get a fully-strong structure.  Even much smaller thicknesses of
deposition may provide adequate strength for many applications.

Not only does the process introduce little or no side loading or
distortion, but submerging the workpiece in water actually reduces the
side loading resulting from the weight of the wire, though this is not
very significant if the wire is a dense material like copper.

[As Wolf Hilbertz discovered in 01976][0], cathodic deposition is
significant even in seawater, where it results not in electroplating
but in the precipitation of a hydromagnesite-aragonite stone due to
the hydroxyls formed at the cathode; apparently he got about 5 cm/year
(1.6 nm/s) with under 4 volts, though I vaguely remember the Mother
Earth News article recommending 12 volts.  If you get to choose the
electrolyte you can do electrodeposition of metals much faster than
that; presumably that’s true of these carbonate minerals as well.  See
file `freezer-seacrete.md` for more notes on seacrete.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biorock "Seacrete"

(Of course electrodeposition, either of metal or of stone, is also
interesting as a way to add strength to aluminum-foil structures,
including aluminum-foil origami.)