Thinking more about 3-D printing phosphate rocks.  The prince of
phosphates is the quartz-like berlinite, an aluminum phosphate.
Obvious solution: squirt soluble aluminum salts like aluminum chloride
into soluble phosphate salts like diammonium phosphate, or vice versa,
to precipitate it, maybe in the interstices of some dirt.

(The other soluble aluminum salts are the sulfate, the nitrate, the
lactate, and the perchlorate, as well as the alums, and any of them
could be used; sodium aluminate might also be worth a mention, since
it precipitates out the insoluble aluminum hydroxide gibbsite in
anything but a very alkaline environment.  Potassium aluminate, which
has very similar properties, is sold for phosphorus-precipitation
water treatment.)

Next step: what if we produce the aluminum salt electrolytically on
demand from an aluminum electrode?  Maybe run NaCl over the electrode
to produce aluminum chloride or sodium aluminate.  Probably you still
need to do the electrolysis in a clean chamber and squirt the result
into some kind of powder or solution instead of just sticking the
electrode into mud and applying a voltage, unless buildup on the
electrode itself is what you’re going for.

But producing aluminum itself is costly and demanding in a variety of
ways.  What if we don’t have aluminum metal, just an aluminum ore like
bauxite?  Maybe we could electrolytically produce soluble aluminum
salts from it and squirt them out; for example, with a chloride
electrolyte like NaCl and a silver-plated, gold-plated, or graphite
anode, or a sulfate electrolyte and a lead or graphite anode, or a
sodium-salt electrode and a steel cathode.  The alums occur naturally
on Earth in water-soluble form, so in their cases you wouldn’t even
need electrolysis.

What if you instead want to extract the phosphate electrolytically?
Maybe a slurry of apatite with a sulfate salt (sodium, say) and a lead
or graphite anode could solubilize phosphate while immobilizing most
of the calcium, and the result could be directly squirted onto a power
containing aluminum cations, maybe even in an insoluble form like the
trihydroxide, to form the phosphate of aluminum.

You might even be able to carry out both processes simultaneously,
thus eliminating the need to neutralize unwanted ions from the other
half of the electrolysis.

In both these aluminum-metal-free processes, you could probably skip
most or all of the usual refining of the mineral feedstocks, because
the usual contaminants either mostly won’t dissolve or won’t harm the
desired cement-formation reactions.  For example, bauxite often
contains troublesome impurities of reactive silica, hematite,
rutile/perovskite, and lime, all of whose cations would react with
phosphate to form hard, insoluble rocks in much the same way as
aluminum.  Such a mix might have more favorable properties than pure
aluminum phosphate; for example, species like hydroxyapatite that
nucleate and grow rapidly could provide early strength, especially if
they form acicular or platy crystals, allowing time for slower-growing
crystals of other minerals to form over a longer period of time.

Aside from the potential for 3-D printing, this family of processes
could also be used for grouting soil to stabilize it as a foundation
for buildings or civil-engineering projects like highways.

Massive crystalline berlinite is fairly hard and inert, so if that can
be persuaded to form, it should be possible to reveal the resulting
shape by abrading or dissolving away the softer or more reactive
ingredients.

Another interesting possibility is the mineralization of wood (or
other porous substances that are easy to shape, such as carbon foam or
plaster of Paris) by soaking such materials into it one after the
other (perhaps forcing them in under high pressure), hopefully forming
a surface layer of wood enhanced with the incombustible, hard, stiff,
insoluble phosphate mineral.  This obviously has potential
disadvantages: the phosphate is not the only product of the reaction
--- aluminum chloride and diammonium phosphate, for example, will also
produce ammonium chloride; the solvent remains, and may have
difficulty escaping the low-porosity material; and the ingredients may
not be completely consumed, and in some cases may attack the wood over
time, for example hydrolyzing it.

This sort of thing seems like a potential appealing low-cost
hydrothermal route to “ceramic-matrix composites”, somewhat similar to
the bargain-basement gypsum remineralization described in file
`glauber-drywall.md`.  First, layup and fixation of the reinforcing
fibers (perhaps zirconia, alumina, mullite, carborundum, graphite,
basalt, metals like steel, or ordinary glass fiber), using some sort
of very porous adhesive (perhaps a minimal amount of plaster of
Paris), and sizing of the fibers with a lower-strength material to
enable fiber pull-out.  (Traditional CMC manufacturing uses pyrolytic
carbon or boron nitride for this sizing.)  Second, saturation of the
fiber reinforcement with one of the salts that will produce the
matrix, followed by drying it to remove the unnecessary water.  Third,
application of the other salt to form the desired mineral matrix, such
as berlinite.

To form large crystals, capable of bridging larger gaps, it’s
desirable for reaction conditions to be just barely favorable for
crystal nucleation.  For some systems, this can be achieved by
temperature control, but that seems unlikely to help much in this
case, given the very low solubility of the aluminum phosphate in water
at any reasonable temperature.  If the amount of aluminum phosphate
dissolved in the water never rises very high, this could help,
although at the cost of making the reaction take a long time.  This
requires limiting the rate of the reaction that produces it, either
(unlikely) by very low temperatures, or by having a very low
concentration of one of the ingredients.

For example, if solid gibbsite is the source of the aluminum, you
could flow an abundant amount of very dilute diammonium phosphate
through it, perhaps forming aluminum phosphate at a low enough rate
that nearly all of it would deposit on existing phosphate crystals
rather than forming their own.  But this might simply encase the
gibbsite crystals in an inert layer of berlinite, passivating them.
The difficulty with doing this with two water-soluble ingredients is
that flowing an abundant amount of a very dilute ingredient through
the porous object would wash away the other ingredient.

If it’s possible to supply one of the salts as a vapor instead of a
liquid solution, that could perhaps solve this problem, because a low
concentration could be applied for a period of time.  Aluminum
chloride sublimes at 180°, for example, while the soluble phosphate
remains liquid even after losing all its water at 212°, so perhaps hot
aluminum chloride vapor could form berlinite on phosphate-bearing
surfaces in the 100°-200° range.

If using the phosphate as a cement to selectively join an aggregate (a
functional filler), obvious candidates for the aggregate include clay
grains, quartz, and sapphire, aside from the fibers and whiskers
mentioned previously.
