Suppose you have made a lightweight model of something out of aluminum
foil or thin aluminum mesh, for example by origami or stamping or
bending, and you’d like to solidify that geometry.  But the aluminum
foil is very lightweight and flimsy (see file `aluminum-foil.md`,
typically 10 μm) and so it can’t withstand much force at all without
deforming dramatically.

Extending this to thinner metal sheets such as gold leaf would be
desirable but seems much more challenging.

One approach to this is cathodic deposition, whether of metals or of
other minerals; see file `freezer-seacrete.md`.  That file covers many
candidate approaches to cathodic deposition of nonmetals.  But there
are some other approaches I want to explore.

Waterglass spray systems
------------------------

Another thing you can do is to coat the foil with waterglass, for
example by spraying.  I think this is sort of the opposite of spray
drying: as in spray drying, you want very fine droplets, under 10 μm,
so that they don’t collapse the aluminum with their weight, but you
probably need the air to be sufficiently humid that the fine droplets
do not dry before they can stick to the aluminum, where they are
smoothed out by the surface tension of the solution and the
hydrophilicity of the surface.  (You may need to functionalize the
surface to be more hydrophilic first.)  With sufficiently outrageous
pressure, you should be able to atomize even a fairly concentrated
waterglass solution (≈30%) through a small orifice.

By this means you ought to be able to deposit an additional 10 μm or
so of waterglass on the surface of the aluminum to stiffen it; upon
exposing the object to dry, hot air, such a thin film should be able
to dry fairly quickly.  The resulting silica gel might be 5 μm thick
on both sides of the foil, doubling its thickness. [Silica xerogel is
not very stiff][0], with a Young’s modulus in the neighborhood of *E*
= 3 GPa (compare to aluminum’s *E* = 70–90 GPa).

[0]: https://mdpi-res.com/d_attachment/gels/gels-01-00256/article_deploy/gels-01-00256.pdf "Mechanical Properties and Brittle Behavior of Silica Aerogels, by Thierry Woignier, Juan Primera, Adil Alaoui, Pascal Etienne, Florence Despestis, and Sylvie Calas-Etienne, Gels 02015, 1, 256-275; 10.3390/gels1020256, CC-BY"

If the surface is sprayed in the same way, either before or after the
silicate, with a solution of a salt containing polyvalent cations that
will not displace aluminum in the metal, with anions that will not
decompose to oxidize the aluminum (such as the acetate or formate of
magnesium, calcium, manganese(II), zinc, copper, or iron, especially
ferrous but even ferric; or the acetate, sulfate, nitrate, iodide, or
chloride of aluminum or magnesium; or the nitrate or iodide of
calcium) it should immediately render the silicate insoluble upon
contact, in the same way as in Keim’s process for mineral painting
(Keimfarben), but much more rapidly because of the thinness of the
layer and because of carrying out the whole process at an elevated
temperature.

In addition, some of the resulting silicate compounds might be stiffer
than a simple silica xerogel; *some* silicates of aluminum and
magnesium are notable for their outstanding quartz-like hardness.  I
think aluminum and magnesium are also more advantageous in this
respect because there is no danger that they will displace the
aluminum metal, so they afford a wider choice of salts than zinc,
copper, or iron, and because they contain more valence electrons per
mass; I fear that the acetate, sulfate, nitrate, iodide, or chloride
of zinc, copper, or iron might corrode the aluminum, though I think
they normally are not sufficiently aggressive to corrode it in the
time available.

(In general, lower alkalinity waterglasses will not only be able to
solidify with smaller additions of polyvalent cations, but will also
produce stiffer materials, because the silicate network tends to
provide most of the mineral’s strength.)

Alternative ways to rapidly solidify waterglass include carbonic acid
gas, and alcohols such as methanol or ethanol, but these last are
reputed to produce a rubbery effect which would be counterproductive
in this context.

Aqueous phosphate spray systems
-------------------------------

As an alternative to waterglass in this process, sources of soluble
phosphate can be used, such as phosphoric acid and the soluble
monobasic, dibasic, or tribasic phosphates of sodium, potassium, or
azanium.  These can be reacted with polyvalent cations in the same way
as the soluble silicates to form insoluble mineral phosphates, some of
which are competitive in hardness with the silicates.  In many cases
the reactions are not as calm as the corresponding silicate reactions.

Sufficient quantities of phosphoric acid can convert aluminum foil
into the water-soluble acidic monoaluminum tri(dihydrogen)phosphate,
though normally this reaction takes hours, while the more usual 1:1
aluminum phosphate is aggressively insoluble.  Another possible
disadvantage of phosphoric acid is that it would be much harder to dry
out.  I don’t think the other phosphates are aggressive enough to
attack aluminum foil.

The azanium phosphates are particularly interesting here because the
azanium can be driven off by heating, leaving the anhydrous acid if
this is done before adding the other reagent; the monobasic phosphate
decomposes around 200°.  In the case where the salt contributing the
polyvalent cations is a muriate, fluoride, iodide, or formate, the
heating step can remove the azanium-salt byproduct entirely after
combining the two solutions, leaving only the desired mineral.  Of
these, the azanium muriate gas is probably the least objectionable.

Pyrophosphates or metaphosphates are likely alternatives to
orthophosphates here; as with lower-alkalinity soluble silicates,
these longer-chain phosphates may require smaller amounts of
polyvalent cations and produce stiffer materials.  If this effect
exists, it would be much weaker than with the silicate systems.

General remarks on aqueous spray systems
----------------------------------------

Getting sprayed drops of the right size onto the aluminum is probably
best done by producing the spray in a chamber with a slight updraft
which will carry the smaller drops to the workpiece, while allowing
larger drops to fall and be recycled.  In the cases other than
waterglass/carbonic acid, it would be best to use one such chamber for
each liquid so that they do not react in the spray chamber and can be
recycled safely.

Micron-sized filler particles, such as clay, talc, mica, silica (as in
sol-silicate paint), or nanotubes (whether of carbon, BCN, boron
nitride, halloysite, or some other material) could further enhance the
stiffness of the resulting material and reduce the quantity of
polyvalent cations required.  These could be mixed into either of the
two solutions.

As the object gets thicker layer by layer, it will become stiffer in
proportion to the square of its thickness, so after a while it will be
possible to deposit thicker layers.

Foamable systems
----------------

A possible alternative approach is to form your original shape out of
not one but *two* layers of aluminum foil which are stuck together
with drops of dried waterglass before being formed.  Upon heating the
formed shape, the waterglass softens, and the substantial amount of
water locked inside its gel structure bubbles out, forming a foam,
which pushes the two sheets of aluminum some distance apart.  If the
waterglass layer is continuous before foaming, this will badly distort
the shape and quite likely rip the aluminum foil, but if adequate
space is present laterally between the drops, they will have space to
expand without damaging the foil or distorting the shape much, while
still forming a continuous foam network and doing most of their
expansion perpendicular to the surface.  Once cooled, the resulting
sandwich panel is potentially substantially more rigid than the
original easily-formable material.

According to a preliminary test on a much larger scale (see file
`material-observations.md`, section 02021-08-20) waterglass foamed by
heating commonly expands in volume by about a factor of 10; so a layer
of 10-μm-thick waterglass drops that is half waterglass drops and half
air might expand 5× in thickness to 50 μm, making the total sandwich
panel 70 μm and, I think, 9× its original rigidity ((60/20)²).  If you
can manage full density, no spaces between drops, without ripping the
foil, you can get to 100 μm and 30× the original rigidity ((110/20)²).

By placing the waterglass drops along a pattern of crisscrossing
lines, rather than uniformly distributed over the whole plane, it may
be possible to use less total material at the expense of less increase
in thickness and thus in rigidity.

If instead of a sandwich between two layers of foil we deposit the
drops of waterglass on a wire mesh, they are more likely to chip off,
but they will tend to distort the form less when heated, forming a
solid foam piece.

If instead of waterglass we use drops of dried phosphates of azanium,
heating will drive off azanium instead of water, melting the resulting
phosphoric acid and allowing it to foam up with the azanium gas.  A
slow-acting source of polyvalent cations, inert to phosphates of
azanium at room temperature but reactive with warm anhydrous
phosphoric acid, can be mixed in with the phosphates.  Oxides of zinc,
copper, aluminum, iron, or magnesium would probably work well for this
with the grain size and grain surface structure adjusted to get the
right level of reactivity.

In either case, including a small amount of a polyvalent cation in the
waterglass or phosphate solution before drying, but not enough to
precipitate on its own, might enable it to gel at a higher water
content, thus providing a greater foaming structure.

Borax is another material that foams up at temperatures below the
melting point of aluminum, because like waterglass it softens up and
water is driven out, but it’s not as easy to precipitate a
water-insoluble material from.  It might be possible to convert it
into hydroboracite (CaMgB₆O₁₁·6H₂O) by reacting it with both calcium
and magnesium ions, but this is far from the enthusiasm with which the
phosphate and silicate systems form insoluble products, and even
hydroboracite is not very hard.

Mixing pyrophosphates, orthophosphates, and metaphosphates together
may be useful to encourage phosphates to form an amorphous gel (that
can trap a lot of water) rather than crystals (which in a few cases
can be quite hydrated, for example the decahydrates of di- and
trisodium phosphate.)
