You can get neutral waterglass to foam up into an open-cell-foam glass
just by heating it to its softening point (I didn’t measure with a
thermometer, maybe 500°?) over the course of a few minutes.  The
structure of the resulting foam is fairly coarse, and the density is
not that low.

How
---

A couple of possibilities occur to me to improve the structure.

Water is probably the best blowing agent for this kind of thing, just
based on its low molecular weight.  Ammonia might be a possibility,
too.

First, waterglass solution doesn’t solidify at room temperature until
it’s something like 35% waterglass by mass, and so when you heat it up
slowly, any water in excess of that 65% (or even a bit more, since
solubility increases at higher temperatures) will bubble out in the
liquid state, before the solid foam can form.  Adding small amounts of
polyvalent cations (such as calcium or magnesium, or maybe even
aluminum or boron) is well known to decrease its solubility to by
orders of magnitude, so perhaps they could permit the formation of a
solid hydrogel with much higher water content, perhaps 90%, 99%, or
99.9%, with a corresponding decrease in the density of the final
product.  There must be some density limit below which you get glass
mist rather than glass foam, but given how viscous glasses can be just
above their softening point, the limit might be pretty low.

Second, if the expansion is carried out very quickly rather than over
a period of time, bubbles will have less time to coalesce into larger
bubbles and convert the foam into the open-cell form.  So perhaps the
solid hydrogel precursor could be foamed more effectively in the way
that rice and breakfast cereals were originally puffed (and still are
by roadside vendors in China and Korea), by first heating it under
pressure to its softening point, then suddenly releasing the pressure.
For most cereals this is done by heating the cereal to the proper
temperature inside a cereal cannon, then whacking the valve on the
front of the cannon with a hammer, allowing the cereal to blow the
cannon door open; but for popcorn it is instead done by encasing a
small ball of the starch hydrogel in a hermetic hull which contains
the pressure until it ruptures.  Both possibilities might work to
produce lighter-weight glass foam.

In the cannon case, there’s the risk that the glass hydrogel will
completely melt inside the pressure chamber and stick together into a
single mass, and also to its walls.  If the hydrogel is initially
produced in granules, their surfaces can be treated to prevent this,
for example by rolling them in quartz flour (which can be made to
stick either by doing it before they have finished solidifying, by
making the quartz flour hot enough to partially melt the surface, or
by a hot air blast) or by replacing most of the alkali ions near their
surface with polyvalent cations like those mentioned above.

Many minerals might serve as viable alternatives to quartz flour here,
including chalk, quicklime, alabaster, magnesia, zeolites, clays,
talc, feldspar, aluminum hydroxide, mica, or rutile — almost any
mineral used in formulating ceramic clay bodies or glazes will have a
much higher melting point than the waterglass hydrogel, except perhaps
oxides of lead.  Boric acid and borax don’t have a higher melting
point, but still might be an alternative, by forming a borosilicate
network in the surface of the granule.

Most of these treatments to increase the melting point of the
granules’ surfaces would also increase the surface’s strength, which
would permit the use of the cannon-free popcorn process.

An alternative means of puffing rice is “hot salt frying”, in which
salt is heated to a high enough temperature to puff rice (but not melt
the salt), and then the rice (often parboiled) is mixed into it.  The
hot salt transfers heat to the rice much more rapidly than hot air
would at ordinary velocities, so the rice puffs instead of dehydrating
through vapor diffusion as it normally would.  The coarse-grained
puffed rice is then easily sieved out of the fine-grained salt.
Modern continuous-process cereal puffing works the same way, but using
high-speed air or steam rather than solids.  This might be a viable
alternative way to rapidly foam waterglass hydrogels, but media you
wouldn’t want in your food could be used instead of the
salt — anything from the foregoing litany of quartz, chalk, quicklime,
etc., and also carbon.  These would permit the use of higher puffing
temperatures.  Using air, of course, would permit puffing glass at
higher temperatures still, but its low thermal conductivity and
thermal density means you need high-pressure air jets.

You could load a refractory mold full of many such beads of the
hydrogel, but without any such surface treatment, then run hot air or
steam through the mold cavity at high speed in order to expand all the
grains and cause them to fuse together, like expanded polystyrene.
This could be a pretty quick process if the grains are small; the hot
air could convert them into a sort of fluidized bed.

### One crude kitchen experiment ###

I placed a thin irregular slip of air-dried waterglass on a bed of
expanded vermiculite, then dumped a small bowlful of preheated
construction sand on it.  The bowl and sand were not hot enough to
glow visibly, but hot enough to immediately char the towel I was using
to hold the bowl and the towel on the floor that I spilled some of the
hot sand on.  The expanded waterglass foam retrieved from beneath the
sand was about 47 mm long at its longest, 27 mm wide at its widest, 20
mm wide at a narrower point, and 10-12 mm thick over most of its area.
It weighed some 600 mg.  If we approximate the volume as 45 mm × 22 mm
× 10 mm, we get 9.9 cubic centimeters, so 0.06 g/cc, suggesting that
it is about 98% air.  Upon immersing it in a glass of water weighing
421.4 g while supporting it from above with chopsticks, the
measurement increased to 430.4 g, suggesting it was displacing 9.0 mℓ
of water, and upon weighing afterwards, its weight had increased to
1.5 g, suggesting that it had absorbed 900 mg of water, also giving a
volume of 9.9 cubic centimeters.  Although an extra decimal place of
accuracy would give more confidence, particularly given how the scale
readings were drifting upwards while the foam was held underwater, it
seems safe to say that it’s probably 60 ± 30 mg/cc, so maybe 97%-99%
air.

The resulting piece of white foam can be easily handled without
breaking it, but it’s fragile enough that dropping it on the table
sometimes breaks off a corner.  Contact and rubbing make sounds
similar to the sounds of extruded polystyrene, suggesting that the
velocity of sound through the material is similar (and thus a similar
density to stiffness ratio) and that acoustic coupling to air is
pretty good, as you’d expect it to be if its density is only 60×
higher than air’s.

For context, a silica aerogel produced in the 01990s was the
record-holder for least-dense solid material for a while at 3 mg/cc,
and extruded polystyrene panels for building are typically 20–80
mg/cc.

I was concerned that the sand or vermiculite might stick to the
waterglass as it foamed up, but this didn’t seem to happen — there
were three pieces of vermiculite stuck to it, but I think they were
there in the unexpanded waterglass, which had oozed onto a
polyethylene sheet out of some vermiculite I was trying to glue
together earlier.

Later, I reheated the foam to drive out the water and verify that it
still weighed 600 mg.  After removing it from the hot bowl on the
stove, I could hear crackling inside the foam as the thermal shock
induced fractures inside the foam.

Fragments of this foam melted and collapsed when heated with a butane
torch to red or orange heat (say, 700–900°).  In an effort to raise
this softening point, I tried boiling another foam fragment made in a
similar way in aqueous magnesium chloride for a while, then boiling it
in tap water for a while to get rid of the magnesium chloride.  The
idea was that the magnesium, without changing the structure of the
foam, would replace some or most of the sodium to produce some kind of
mostly magnesium silicate, which would be water-insoluble and have a
much higher melting point.  After a first such tap-water boiling,
there was some white deposit around the water (probably MgCl₂) but the
foam no longer tasted noticeably like magnesium chloride.  Just in
case, I boiled it in fresh tap water for a while longer, which left
less of a white deposit around the water.

Wet, the fragment sank in bottom of water and weighed 400mg.  Dried,
it weighed “0”: under the 100mg low end of my crappy scale.  After
heating it with the blowtorch to an orange-yellow heat (800°–1000°?)
for several minutes, which produced some sodium yellow in the flame at
first, it appeared slightly smaller and less white, more translucent.
Upon putting it in water, rather than floating at first as before, it
immediately sank, and its wet weight was still "0", so, under 100mg.
This suggests that its pore space had diminished by at least a factor
of 4 from this treatment, and that the pores had become larger.

This survival for several minutes contrasts strongly with the behavior
of the freshly prepared foam, which shrivels up to a tiny bead in
seconds upon being heated in the same way.

I’m repeating the MgCl₂ procedure with another piece from the 9.9mℓ
chunk of foam just to make sure I’m not fooling myself.  I kind of
fucked it up because I let it boil dry, and then didn’t let it cool
back down before adding water, so water was boiling fiercely as it
re-wet the foam, which probably did some real damage to its structural
integrity.  Also, the first time I did it in the cut-off bottom of an
aluminum can; this time I’m doing it in a steel bowl with a badly
oxidized plating of something like nickel, so there may be different
compounds running around.  And the water is cloudy white (perhaps due
to particles of insoluble silicate broken off when I re-added the
water) rather than transparent as before.

The second magnesium-infused chunk of foam did indeed withstand the
blowtorch flame; but I think it lost significant weight during the
magnesium-infusion process, and it looks significantly smaller.  At
any rate, once dry, it weighed in at “0 g” again.  Wet, it weighs 1.1
g.

To test it further, I put it back in the bowl of vermiculite and built
an aluminum-foil arch over the top of it, then heated it to yellow
heat (parts to white heat) for several more minutes with the butane
torch.  It appeared unharmed, but after cooling was evidently more
fragile than before, and its wet weight was 1.0 g, so it may have lost
10% or 20% of its pore space through this treatment.  Also, the
aluminum part of my butane torch nozzle melted and the brass tip fell
out on the floor, so I had to stop.

To test compressive strength, I cut a 13 mm × 18 mm rectangular piece
of the non-magnesium-treated foam and sanded two surfaces fairly flat,
making it about 6 mm thick.  I placed it on a larger scale and crushed
it by pressing down slowly on a slab of granite placed atop it with my
hand; it began to crush around 1 kg and completed crushing around 2
kg.  1 kg gravity / 13 mm / 18 mm is about 40 kPa, so the compressive
strength of the foam is probably somewhere in the neighborhood of
20–80 kPa.  This is an order of magnitude lower than
construction-insulation styrofoams, which are typically in the 150–700
kPa range, measured by the DIN 53421 standard, which evidently
specifies 10% deflection as the limit.

(See also file `magnesium-silicate.md`.)

Why
---

The glass foam resulting from foaming waterglass can be abraded or
sawn (or crushed) very easily, and the possibility of cutting it with
a hot wire, like styrofoam, is very appealing, especially if its
density can be decreased further.  Although it’s quite weak, it could
be very useful for supporting granular slightly-denser materials such
as perlite, vermiculite, alumina foam, and cheap carbon foam, for
example while an adhesive sets (see file `leaf-resin-roof.md` for one
use for this).  Because of its relatively low melting point and very
low density, it might be possible to “burn it out” in such cases,
leaving only a thin layer of residue.

It was easy to bore a hole through one of the scraps prepared in the
crude kitchen experiment described above using an 850-μm spring-steel
wire, just by poking at the foam with the end of the wire.  The
material did not visibly shatter or chip as the wire poked through the
back side.

A different way of using this glass foam to support stronger materials
is to first get it into the right shape (whether by expanding beads
into a mold, gluing together a bunch of pre-expanded beads and pushing
them into a mold, by cutting or abrading at low temperatures, or by
hot-wire cutting) and then use the resulting form as either a mold or
a stucco substrate.  This is more or less the same way styrofoam is
used for molding, for example, concrete, or as a base for a fiberglass
layup.  By painting, spraying, wrapping, laying up, or otherwise
depositing a stronger material onto its surface, you can make a
strong, hard shell.  This may need to be done in stages, first
building up a lightweight shell that can be supported by the foam,
then a stronger shell supported by the lightweight shell, then perhaps
a solid object filling the whole shell.

Why would you use glass foam for this rather than styrofoam?  Well, it
doesn’t require any organic materials, so it’s potentially much
cheaper.  Being more rigid means you can cut it to precise dimensions
more easily, and it will bend less when you’re doing things to it that
impose slight side loads, like painting or stuccoing it.  It can
withstand common solvents without any complaint, unlike styrofoam, and
it can withstand higher temperatures than any organic polymer.
Counterintuitively, it might be possible to get it to a *lower*
density than styrofoam, because silicate glass (even waterglass) has a
much higher strength-to-weight ratio than polystyrene; however,
experiment so far has not realized this possibility.

Also, if the density gets low enough, you can use glass foam for
lost-foam casting, particularly for casting of materials like basalt,
fused quartz, lead glass, or soda-lime glass that will happily
dissolve the glass-foam residues.

It might be possible to raise the melting point of the foam once it
has been shaped through ion exchange, for example with salts of
magnesium, iron, boron, or aluminum.  Saturating the foam with an
aqueous solution of such soluble salts might be enough.
