I was making some waterglass foam today, just by heating up some
liquid waterglass on aluminum foil in an aluminum-foil-covered steel
bowl over a fire, and it occurred to me that maybe it’s possible to
get the most crucial aspects of the structure of wood in a glass-fiber
composite in a very simple way.

Specifically, I’m thinking that you ought to be able to soak a
glass-fiber tow or stack of unidirectional cloths in waterglass, then
bake it, just as I did without the fiber today.  The waterglass will
attack the glass-fiber tow at high temperatures, but I think the whole
process can be done at a low enough temperature to keep that to a
minimum.  The result should or might be a glass composite material
consisting of a lightweight foam holding together a lot of parallel
fibers.

There are a number of potentially interesting aspects of this kind of
composite, but the primary one that interests me is the combination of
load-bearing capability with ease of mechanical shaping.  In general,
materials that can bear a lot of load, such as diamond, tungsten
carbide, sapphire, quartz, steel, are also hard to shape mechanically.
There are at least two ways to escape from this: post-shaping
hardening (like concrete or heat treatments of steel, or casting), and
foams.

Natural wood is a foam, with continuous parallel cellulose fibers
connected together with lignin glue, plus lots of empty space.  The
empty space has several big advantages: it makes wood much easier to
cut; it makes the wood much stiffer, like a sandwich panel; it
inhibits crack propagation from one fiber to another, dramatically
improving impact strength, because cracks perpendicular to fibers must
propagate along a jagged zigzag path (“splintering”), greatly
increasing the energy required; and it allows impacts to plastically
deform the material without damaging fibers.  (Bamboo is also a
fiber-foam composite, but with a different structure; see DOI
10.1007/s00226-007-0127-8.)

Other solid foams, such as refractory firebrick, waterglass foam,
styrofoam, and polyurethane cushions, are also much easier to shape
than the corresponding bulk material would have been.  Earlier tonight
I cut through waterglass foam with a box cutter; I could push the
unsupported blade all the way through 15 mm or more of foamed
waterglass, corresponding to about 1 mm of solid glass, only because
the particles displaced by the knife could move aside into the voids
in the foam.

Ceramic-matrix composites get their improvement in impact strength by
recruiting a longer section of crack-bridging fibers to elastically
resist crack-widening movements than the section actually within the
crack; this is enabled by weakening the bonding between the matrix and
the fiber reinforcement.  This seems closely analogous to the
splintering behavior of natural wood, but I’m not sure it’s quite the
same.

So my thesis is that maybe a composite of glass foam and glass fibers
will be lightweight, rigid, easy to cut, and impact-resistant.

Alternative or supplementary fiber reinforcements might include steel,
basalt, copper, carborundum, or carbon fiber.

If the foaming of the glass is to happen rapidly and uniformly, it
would be helpful for the heat to be applied by a reaction within the
mixture (so-called “self-propagating high-temperature synthesis”), but
it is probably crucial that the direction of propagation of this
reaction be at right angles to the fiber direction; if it is in the
direction of the fibers it will not only stretch them but also kink
them.  For this purpose it might be helpful to lay the reagents into
the foam in the form of “fibers” parallel to the structural fibers, so
that the reaction can propagate very rapidly along each “fiber” but
much more slowly from one “fiber” to another; to make these reagent
“fibers” hollow; and to apply the initial ignition simultaneously
along the whole length of the material.  SHS could perhaps be usefully
applied to higher-temperature glass foaming reactions which might
yield stronger and more water-resistant foams than waterglass; the
conventional one seems to be reacting manganese dioxide with carbon in
a matrix of soda-lime glass, but many others are possible.
