Glauber’s salt is an appealing material for both phase-change thermal
energy storage and thermochemical energy storage, but the usual ways
to make it might be inconvenient at small scales, particularly in
places where the police consider such activities suspicious.  So how
can you make it from non-suspicious materials?

It occurs to me that gypsum is much more water-soluble than calcite,
particularly at pH above 7, so in an equilibrium between solid gypsum,
solid calcite, and some aqueous solution with some other cation that
is highly soluble with both anions, there will be very little gypsum
left.  So perhaps you can boil drywall (plaster of Paris) in baking
soda for a while (months?) to get Glauber’s salt, or just boil the
baking soda to liberate the carbonate ion and then soak the plaster in
the resulting liquor (for months?) after cooling.

Aside from its potential use as a source of mirabilite, this
remineralization process might be a useful way to strengthen objects
initially shaped from plaster of Paris (or composites cemented with
it), at least if they survive it intact rather than falling to pieces
or swelling out of shape.  Plaster of Paris is easy to mold and sets
up in a few minutes; it’s easy to abrade, cut, and burnish to precise
dimensions once it’s set; it’s a fairly non-corrosive environment; and
it adheres well to a wide variety of functional fillers, including
traditional fillers like quartz sand, horsehair, and various forms of
cellulose fibers, but also I think higher-performance fillers like
fiberglass which are never used with it in practice.  It would be very
valuable to convert the resulting weak plaster or plaster-cemented
composite, which will simply crumble with enough exposure to water, to
the much stronger calcite or a calcite-cemented composite like lime
mortar.  ([Matweb gives limestone as 5-25 MPa tensile, 14-255 MPa
compressive][0], but that’s presumably full of cracks; I’m having a
hard time finding properties of the pure minerals.)

[0]: http://www.matweb.com/search/datasheet.aspx?matguid=87597d62662c46a7a308b11e16c563c6&ckck=1

Lime-mortar buildings have stood for thousands of years in rainy
areas, and calcite can also withstand much higher temperatures than
plaster of Paris for many cycles.  (Plaster of Paris won’t melt, but
it dehydrates below 200°, shrinking and losing strength, while
calcining calcite back to quicklime requires temperatures over 600°,
normally over 800°.)  Moreover, the use of lime cement in the
traditional form imposes very significant restrictions: the pH of the
slaked-lime cement mix before it sets is high enough to degrade most
glass fibers, limiting the strength of the final result.  It also
attacks most candidate thickeners and thixotropic additives, and so
without a large amount of filler (normally quartz sand), lime cement
tends to just turn into a puddle.  If calcite objects could instead be
created by remineralization of plaster of Paris, it would avoid these
problems.

Even if the remineralization process required a large amount of other
feedstocks relative to the gypsum, it could be very valuable: small
additions of plaster of Paris with ordinary portland cement have of
course been tried, and while the result does set up quickly, it never
achieves much strength.  If this is due to gypsum in the structure
that could be converted to the much stronger calcite in such an easy
way, many new possibilities appear.
