Suppose we have a bunch of Lego-like bricks that can be attached
together to make a temporary or permanent dwelling space.  They might
include LEDs for lighting, 240VAC outlets, speakers, mattresses,
cabinets, drawers, carpets, mirrors, ovens, stove burners, air
conditioners, refrigerators, toilets, etc.  If the size and connectors
are standardized, they can be composed in a variety of different
Minetestish ways to make temporary or permanent furniture or dwelling
spaces, perhaps inside of an existing suboptimal dwelling space.

You could imagine locking together a few dozen such independently
wheelable blocks into a modular “dwelling machine” or “habitaculum”
inside an arbitrary apartment, perhaps occupying some 10 m² of floor
space and containing bed, desk, and shower, standing off the floor on
short legs.

(I read a book from the 01970s recently that mentions in passing that
the author’s friends did something like this in their shitty apartment
in La Boca in Buenos Aires.  I think it might have been Hennessey and
Papanek’s _Nomadic Furniture 2_.)

Some of the deficiencies of existing dwelling spaces that can be thus
remedied:

- Inadequate air conditioning.  Here in Argentina many windows have
  roll-down shutters above them which permit wind to blow right
  through, and the regulations require 100 cm² openings in the walls
  where gas appliances are installed to prevent gas buildup.  The
  resulting quantity of airflow on a hot windy day makes adequate air
  conditioning very difficult to achieve.  A small, relatively sealed
  inner space without gas appliances can be free of such unwanted air
  leaks and can be air conditioned much more cheaply.
  
- Air filtering.  The covid pandemic has made us aware that our indoor
  air is generally of very poor quality, and that this is a major risk
  not only for contagion of respiratory diseases like covid, but also
  for health in general.  One of the biggest problems, especially in
  big cities like Buenos Aires with lots of high-sulfur diesel, is
  particulate pollution; pollen and mold spores are problems for
  sensitive people even in other places.  Again, this is a difficult
  problem to solve without being able to limit the ingress of bad air,
  but an easy one to solve with controlled airflow.
  
- Thermal insulation, which makes air conditioning much more
  reasonable.  Most buildings here are made of concrete with
  single-paned windows.  The 10 m² habitáculo suggested above might
  have 45 m² of surface area (25 m² of walls and 20 m² of ceiling and
  floor).  If this is all sheathed with 100 mm of 0.3 W/m/K insulating
  material, maintaining a 20° difference through the wall (e.g., from
  21° within to 41° without, or 21° within to 1° without) requires
  2700 W of heating or cooling power; with a typical CoP of 3, this is
  an air conditioner of only 900 W.  Thicker insulation than this may
  be feasible, cutting the required power further, and usually the
  temperature delta is much smaller.
  
- Storage.  Many apartments and houses do not have much storage built
  in, being designed for consumers or socialites rather than
  craftspeople or the self-sufficient.
  
- Flooding.  I just found a roll of toilet paper that had been
  water-damaged under the sink today; I guess the pipes are leaking
  again.  I’ve had my clothes, neatly stacked in the closet, turn
  moldy from water leakage from a poorly constructed bathroom.  When
  it rains, the roof here has leaked in two different rooms, creating
  big puddles on the floor before the landlord fixed the roof.  In the
  apartment where I lived in La Boca, there was such a big hole in the
  roof that there were mushrooms growing down from the ceiling.
  Sometimes there’s widespread flooding when rains outpace the storm
  sewers, although here in Buenos Aires the last big floods were about
  10 years ago before they fixed the storm sewers.  Most commonly only
  a centimeter or two of water gets onto your floor, but that’s enough
  to ruin your computer, short out your power strip, ruin your
  mattress (if it’s on the floor), destroy your tatami, and demolish
  your books (if they’re on the floor).  All of this can be avoided if
  everything is up off the normal floor, especially if the habitaculum
  itself is watertight.

- Lighting.  Most buildings are inadequately lit (50-500 lux), which
  possibly causes seasonal affective disorder, widespread depression,
  and sleep phase disorders.  Full daylight is 10-25 kilolux in the
  shade, about 100 times brighter, and direct sunlight is 100 kilolux.
  A lux is a lumen per square meter; to illuminate a black room to 1
  kilolux requires a kilolumen per square meter, while a white or
  mirrored room may be about five times as efficient.  For our example
  10 m² habitaculum with 45 m² surface area, if we paint it white, we
  might need 9 kilolumens per kilolux.  Both Samsung and Philips are
  shipping 200-lumen-per-watt LEDs since 02017, ordinary fluorescent
  tubes can hit 100 lm/W, ordinary LED bulbs are in the neighborhood
  of 75 lm/W, and sunlight is 93 lm/W.  So reaching 10 kilolux might
  require 90 kilolumens and thus 450-1200 watts powering the lights,
  or less in a smaller area, and about US$20 worth of fluorescent
  tubes or US$500 worth of LEDs.

- Mosquitoes.  In the Boca apartment with mushrooms growing from the
  ceiling, we constantly had mosquitoes because, as with most
  Argentine houses, there were no screens on the windows.  (For a
  while I dated a woman who had moved into an apartment in terrible
  condition with screens on all the windows.  As part of her
  renovation, she removed the screens because she didn’t like how they
  looked.)  Excluding mosquitoes from a small space without windows is
  easier than excluding them from a large space with windows.

- Spaces totally without amenities.  There are numerous industrial and
  storage spaces, both in Argentina and in the rest of the world, that
  have electrical power, or can get it, but lack running water,
  climate control, floors, sewage treatment, and so on.  These spaces
  are often much cheaper to rent than more livable spaces in the same
  area.  An easily portable modular habitaculum could provide a
  convenient alternative to a camping trailer.

- Noise.  If you have many centimeters of some kind of sound-absorbing
  material between you and the outside world, you will be less annoyed
  by the superchargers on buses interrupting your conversation.

- Portability.  Moving out is a huge pain in the ass.  This was a
  major motivation for Papanek’s _Nomadic Furniture  and _Nomadic
  Furniture 2_.

- Coziness.  A small space can be much more comfortable than a large
  one if properly organized.

- Saving wear and tear on the property.  When you move out, it’s nice
  if you don’t have to repaint.

Standard residence doors range from 625 mm up to maybe 900 mm in
width, and from 2000 mm on up in height.  Standard residence ceilings
are about 2.6 m high, though occasionally there are small areas with
lower ceilings; you need at least 2 m of height inside the habitaculum
for most people to stand up comfortably, and probably more like 2.2 m.
The oppressive feeling of such a low ceiling can be relieved by
covering most of it in mirrors, doubling the visual height of the
space to 4.4 m.

For individual modules to fit through a standard door under the power
of a single person, they ought to have wheels built into them or
trivially attachable, be no wider than 500 mm (to permit passing
through a 620-mm doorway at up to a 36° angle), be no taller than 2000
mm (they can be tilted over to go through low doors), and be no longer
than 1000 mm in order to be manageable in size for a single person.
This ½ × 2 × 1 m size is roughly that of a stack of three
single-bed-sized mattresses, or half of two Minetest blocks.  To be
comfortably pivotable on a corner, they ought to weigh no more than 80
kg, so you never have to lift more than 40 kg; a weight of 40-60 kg,
or even less, would be much better.

This presumes that the modules should have the shape of a rectangular
paralellepiped.  While aesthetically and in terms of structural
strength this might leave something to be desired, walls are
traditionally vertical so as to be in a local gravitational stable
equilibrium, and floors, beds, counters, and tables are necessarily
horizontal.  So polyhedra of higher degrees of symmetry like the
Platonic dodecahedron, or of lower numbers of connection points like
the tetrahedron, would seem to be impractical.

If your wall modules are exactly 2 m tall, your ceiling or floor
module will need to have some extra space to get up to 2.2 m inside
space; 2.0 m is rather cramped.

So a minimal construction set for a 3.5 m × 3.5 m space (12.25 m²)
might consist of 16 outer wall modules (0.5 m × 2 m × 1 m), 4 ceiling
corner modules (0.25 m × 2 m × 1 m), 4 non-corner ceiling modules
(same), and another 8 floor modules, 32 modules in all, occupying some
24 m³ in storage and enclosing 3.5 m × 3.5 m × 2.2 m = 26.95 m³.  Some
of the modules might contain Murphy beds, others closet space, others
air conditioners.

The minimal volume to merely enclose that space would of course be
much smaller, consisting of thin cubicle-like panels (or panels
similar to Symons forms), perhaps only 20 mm thick.  That would reduce
the total volume when disassembled to something like 0.64 m³.

The modules could connect together at the corners with twistlock-like
connectors, modified to permit watertight connections between them, or
with wedge connectors like the “wedge bolts” that connect
concrete-form panels.  Probably the walls will not have to withstand
more than 2 kN of force, which probably will not have more than a 4:1
mechanical advantage against the corner connectors (spread across two
corners), so with 250 MPa A36 mild steel connectors you only need
about 16 mm² of tensile cross-section per connector to keep the
modules together.  So it ought to be easy enough to use snap
connectors like those used in seatbelts.  However, connectors should
not protrude from the surfaces when not in use (that would make the
modules uncomfortable to sit on or lean against), and because you
might want to disconnect a module that’s currently connected to two or
more other modules, it needs to be possible to disengage the
connections while the modules are still in contact; turning a knob
should enable you to engage or disengage them.  (Knobs are less likely
to be actuated unintentionally than buttons, levers, and the like.)

The modules could probably be built as welded angle iron frames, plus
panels to give them rigidity.  Each wall module has 14 meters of edges
(4 × (½ + 1 + 2)).  Metals Depot will sell you hot rolled A36 12mm ×
12mm × 3mm angle iron for US$5/m, and they say it weighs 570 g/m, so
this would work out to 7.9 kg and US$70, which is a lot less than 80
kg but a bit pricey.  18-gauge A513 12mm × 12mm square tube is a
little lighter but costs more than twice as much.  They also sell ASTM
A527 18-gauge (1.3 mm) galvanized steel sheet for US$73/m², saying it
weighs 10.5 kg/m², which is a slightly lower price per kg.

On Mercado Libre, Almacen Techista here in Buenos Aires sells 30-gauge
(“C30”) galvanized (0.3 mm) for AR$2100 for a 1×2 m sheet, weighing
5.05 kg.  At today’s quote of AR$194.50/US$ that’s US$10.80,
US$5.40/m², or US$2.14/kg, a dramatically lower per-kg price than
Metals Depot.  They also sell 18-gauge cold-rolled (1.25 mm) for
AR$6050 for 1×2 m, which would be about 20 kg, US$31, and US$1.58/kg,
which is cheaper than the galvanized (at Metals Depot cold-rolled is
dearer than hot-rolled, which is dearer than galvanized).

Also on Mercado Libre, Gramabi sells 20 mm × 20 mm × 1.25 mm square
steel structural tubing for AR$1600 for 6 m, US$8.22, US$1.37/m.  I
think that’s 1.19 kg, so US$6.90/kg, which is more similar to the
Metals Depot prices.  But this might be a better grade of steel than
the galvanized roofing sheet metal.

Some of these modules include things that can be controlled or
monitored electronically without a lot of bandwidth, such as LEDs,
fluorescent lights, air conditioners, heat exchangers, speakers, or
thermometers.  If each face of a module where it can be latched onto
another module has an electronic connector as well, and the
microcontroller in each module can identify its module type,
distinguish between the different connectors, and detect their
orientation, then they can build a constantly updated model in memory
of the whole assemblage of modules and all of their hardware,
permitting it to be controlled and monitored from a larger computer.

It’s maybe not necessary for the modules to have electronic (and
electrical power) connectors on every surface.  Legos only have
mechanical connectors on two of their surfaces, only four connectors
in the simplest general case; tee connectors have only three ports and
are capable of being assembled into two- and three-dimensional
networks.  (Think of a cube that can couple to other cubes on three of
its faces.)

This idea seems really cool: you could snap together some modules into
a custom ad-hoc dwelling machine that is immediately reflected in the
mirror world inside your laptop, from which you can control it.

Interestingly, although I had forgotten this, _Nomadic Furniture 2_
profiles a system of modular cubes called “Palaset” by Ristomatti
Ratia, which is in some ways very similar.  They’re polystyrene cubes
designed for storage (shelving, drawers, cabinets) that you can also
sit on, with a 13½” outside size and ¼” walls (345 mm and 6 mm),
linked together with doublestick tape and by inserting asterisk-shaped
plastic “dowels” into holes on their faces.  Some of these are
evidently still available 49 years later at palaset.com for about 20
euros each, though perhaps not as many as were profiled in the book.

The ClicBot educational robot kit works more or less the way I
describe above, with sensors and connectors to create a VR model of
the physical robot that you can then program, but it’s for building
tabletop robots, not dwelling-machines.