Aluminum forms a brittle intermetallic with iron (as well as some
other elements like nickel and cobalt), which I think is the cause of
steel screws seizing in aluminum when unlubricated.  Perhaps you can
exploit this property to mark visible lines on iron and steel using an
aluminum rod.  I think there are three fundamental obstacles: surface
preparation, activation energy, and aluminum cohesion.

If the aluminum is in contact with grease or iron oxide rather than
raw iron, it won’t be able to react.  I think that if the surface is
*reasonably* clean to begin with, it should be possible to surround
the aluminum “pencil lead” with a friable abrasive “wood” to adsorb
the grease and grind through the oxide, maybe a mixture of things like
talc, kaolin, aluminum oxide, and binders.

The activation energy problem is that the aluminum needs to be at a
relatively high temperature to get this reaction.  Since it happens by
accident with screws, I think this is a feasible thing to achieve by
hand, but it might help if the aluminum is in smallish particles, a
foam or sponge, or thin aluminum-foil-like layers, so it won’t conduct
the heat away from the reaction surface.  Maybe thin fibers of
something very hard inside the aluminum would also help by scratching
hot particles off the iron.

The aluminum cohesion problem is that we want the newly formed
intermetallic to stick to the steel rather than the aluminum.  For
this we want to keep the “pencil lead” from having too much structural
strength of its own; if the aluminum is in the form of, again, small
particles, foils, or foam, that should help with this.  This is
somewhat in conflict with the desire to apply a great deal of pressure
to the surface in order to overcome the activation-energy barrier.
