Normally you need high-power lasers (kilowatts) to mark metal.  One
alternative is to lay down a layer of resist (for example, black
electrical tape, or permanent marker) and use a small laser (tens of
watts) to burn off the resist, then etch the metal electrolytically,
with acid, or with reactive ions.

It occurred to me that when you’re burning a layer of resist off the
metal, you’re also producing reactive ions, and maybe those could etch
the metal directly if the “resist” were chosen for that purpose.  This
is different from normal reactive ion etching, where you first lay
down a layer of real resist, and then later put the resist-patterned
workpiece into a vacuum chamber that you fill uniformly with a plasma;
in this technique, the “resist” *is* the plasma, after you blast it
with the laser, so you can do the whole thing at atmospheric pressure.
This saves you the trouble of running corrosive byproduct gases
through your vacuum pump.

For example, nickel (tetra)carbonyl boils at 43°, and maybe you could
form it by heating an oxalate or formate salt on a nickel surface;
disodium oxalate, for example, decomposes at 290°, releasing carbon
monoxide.  Similarly, iron (penta)carbonyl boils at 103°.  (To make
iron carbonyl, sulfur is used as a catalyst and the process is
normally carried out at 5-30 MPa.)  Carbonyl complexes are also known
of molybdenum, chromium, manganese, cobalt, titanium, ruthenium,
rhodium, osmium, iridium, platinum, tungsten, and vanadium, not to
mention many more reactive metals, so perhaps they could be etched in
the same way, but it might not be possible for all of them; it might
be easiest for nickel, followed by iron and rhenium.  Doing the whole
process under a liquid solvent capable of dissolving the carbonyl
complex, such as glacial acetic acid, acetone, or carbon
tetrachloride, would likely help with increasing the pressure (and
thus the equilibrium carbonyl-complex concentration), controlling the
temperature, and reducing hazardous carbonyl emissions.

Carbonyls also decompose under heating to deposit the metal, and so if
you were to laser-heat points on a surface in a metal carbonyl
atmosphere, you could selectively deposit the metal.  (Historically
this chemical-vapor deposition process was used for nonselective
nickel plating, but abandoned for reasons of toxicity.)  Many other
chemical vapor deposition processes could be selectively applied in
the same way by localized laser heating.  This is called laser
chemical vapor deposition, and of course electron-beam-induced
deposition is a higher-resolution vacuum variant of the same
technique.

Alternatives to the ridiculously toxic carbonyls might include
seriously toxic organometallic complexes like tetraethyllead (boils at
85°), diethylzinc (boils at 117°, pyrophoric), or triethylaluminum
(boils at 128°, hypergolic with liquid oxygen.)  In the particular
case of etching aluminum, chloride salts such as ammonium chloride
(reversibly decomposes at 337.6°) could perhaps be used to produce
aluminum trichloride (sublimes at 180°).  If cupric chloride (melts at
498°, decomposes at 993°) were the chloride salt, you might be able to
deposit some metallic copper at the same time as etching the aluminum.

Either for etching or for deposition, you could probably use other CVD
feedstocks like tungsten hexafluoride; silane (pyrophoric gas at room
temperature), trichlorosilane, or TEOS; ammonia (e.g., for depositing
silicon nitride); germane; ferrocene (forms from hot cyclopentadiene
reacting with iron pipes, boils at 249°); uranium hexafluoride;
uranocene; nickelocene (formerly used to prepare nickel films);
cobaltocene (sublimes at 171°); cyclopentadienylcobalt dicarbonyl
(boils at 140°); pentachlorides of molybdenum, tantalum, and titanium;
methane; etc.

If you can start by cooling the substrate metal to cryogenic
temperatures, you might be able to use “resists” that are unstable or
evaporate at higher temperatures.  Fluorine, for example, boils at
-188.11° at one atmosphere, and somewhat more practical cryogenic
temperatures at higher pressures, and so if you cool your substrate
enough, you can bathe it in liquid fluorine which you then encourage
to etch it with local laser heating.  A liquid “resist” would have the
earlier-mentioned advantage of producing higher pressure through
confinement, thus making it much easier to produce large complexes
containing low-boiling substances like tungsten hexafluoride, and also
permit repeated etching of the same spot.

At higher temperatures, such as room temperature, you ought to be able
to use other liquids that are fairly inert until heated with lasers.
Gasoline or mineral oil, for example, could serve as a source of
hydrogen for etching carbon, silicon, or glass, while perfluorohexane
or hexafluorobenzene could serve as a source of fluorine for etching,
say, tungsten or glass.  And of course there are all kinds of
metal/acid combinations that etch not at all or very slowly at STP,
but which, at high temperature and pressure, or when a surface film is
disrupted, etch very rapidly.

There are a surprising number of very stable materials that have
low-boiling hydrides, silicon and carbon of course being the most
conspicuous, but boron also does.  Virtually any acid “resist” could
contribute protons to facilitate such etching, but phosphoric acid
seems like one of the most promising alternatives due to its high
boiling point (over 800°) and willingness to part with its hydrogens.
At lower temperatures ammonium compounds might be a promising
alternative.

Arcs, as in electric discharge machining, are another possible way of
inducing localized high temperatures and pressures at chosen points on
the surface of a workpiece, and so could also serve either to promote
the deposition or the destruction of solid material at the surface of
a workpiece.

Traditional reactive ion etching feedstocks like sulfur hexafluoride
and carbon tetrafluoride would also be viable candidates for producing
the reactive ions on the surface of the workpiece, but heavier
perfluorocarbons like perfluoropentane, or sometimes even carbon
tetrachloride, would probably work better, both because by virtue of
being a liquid at room temperature, they have several hundred times
more fluorine atoms close to the surface, and because of the increased
pressure as mentioned above.  Gases like carbon tetrafluoride
dissolved in some kind of solvent might also work better than just
gases.

Glow-discharge plasmas are another possible way to supply reactive
ions.  By moving one or many sharp-pointed electrodes around close to
a workpiece, you could selectively apply the reactive ions to certain
parts of it; this is routinely done with air for “activating” surfaces
with nonthermal plasmas, including even biological tissues, but of
course other gases would have different effects.  The reactive ions
will tend to attack the sharp point as well, so it either needs to be
inert to the ions, or consumable like a mechanical-pencil lead.
