See also file `firing-talc.md` for notes on magnesium-silicate
ceramics processing, file `glass-foam.md` for notes on using
magnesium chloride to raise the softening point of waterglass foam,
and file `magnesia.md` on the oxide.

In a crude kitchen experiment, I mixed 136 g of a waterglass solution
(35%?) with 136 g of tap water in a cut-off Monster can, then took
72 g of kinda gummy magnesium chloride from the sack where it had been
deliquescing and melted it on the stove.  (If this were the
hexahydrate that would be 34 g of anhydrous.)  It stubbornly refused
to dissolve completely, so I added 48 g of tap water, which did the
trick.  Upon dumping this into the diluted waterglass, it immediately
(<500 ms) formed a solid white slushy material that I couldn’t really
stir with the chopstick, with only a little bit of milky liquid to be
squeezed out of it.  I was able to pour off 62.7 g of this syrupy
liquid with a few chunks, so there’s about 330 g of solid “gel” in the
can, of which only about 14% is waterglass and 22% is the hydrated
magnesium chloride, so probably something like 10% is actual anhydrous
magnesium chloride.  So it’s 76% water, 24% solid matrix.  It feels
gritty, but it’s easily crumbled by hand.  The stuff at the base of
the can, where probably less magnesium penetrated, was even grittier.

Rather than any sort of glassy material, this seems more like a
crystalline precipitate that’s got a lot of water locked up inside its
crystalline structure (a fairly well-defined amount, not the kind of
loosey-goosey anything-goes relationship you see with a gel) and some
more water in the interstices between the numerous sand-sized
crystals.  The obvious candidate would be talc, but although the
crystals are soft, they don’t feel as soft as talc.  More gritty, like
baking soda.  I can’t identify the crystal habit, and I wonder if
maybe the hard substance formed along a mixing boundary between the
two solutions rather than in any sort of crystalline way.  It doesn’t
get less gritty when I rub it around on my hand for a while, and it
doesn’t dissolve in (96%) ethanol.  Heating it at 500° for half an
hour leaves it whiter, and it’s still super crumbly, but tells me
nothing else useful.

[Apparently this is the recipe for synthetic magnesium
silicate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic_magnesium_silicate),
which forms porous, amorphous masses.

Roughly guessing at the stoichiometry, 136 g of 35% waterglass would
be 47 g of waterglass.  If it’s 3:1 SiO₂:Na₂O by weight then that’s 35 g
of silica, which is 60.08 g/mol, so 0.58 mol of silica (and of
silicon).  Anhydrous MgCl₂ is 95.211 g/mol so 34 g of it would be 0.36
mol of MgCl₂ (and of magnesium).  So that’s about 1.6 silicons per
magnesium (Mg/Si molar ratio 0.62).  Forsterite has 2 magnesiums per
silicon (0.5 silicons per magnesium), serpentines have 1.5 magnesiums
(or irons) per silicon, enstatite (the eutectic) has 1 silicon per
magnesium, and talc has 1⅓ silicons per magnesium.  So on average this
material is a little closer to silica gel than talc is.  Synthetic
magnesium silicate for food has 2.5 silicons per magnesium.

It gets a little crunchier when I wash it, maybe because a little
residual sodium silicate was lubricating it.

Apparently at low enough Mg/Si ratios [you get crystalline talc](https://www.dora.lib4ri.ch/empa/islandora/object/empa%3A7119/datastream/PDF2/download/Nied-2016-Properties_of_magnesium_silicate_hydrates_%28M-S-H%29-%28accepted_version%29.pdf "Nied, D., Enemark-Rasmussen, K., L'Hopital, E., Skibsted, J., & Lothenbach, B. (2016). Properties of magnesium silicate hydrates (M-S-H). Cement and Concrete Research, 79, 323-332. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2015.10.003 CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0")
but only above 200°.  The paper suggests that maybe I have some silica
mixed in with my magnesium silicate because I didn’t add enough
magnesium.

I stuck a chunk of the stuff in a bowl with a little sunflower oil in
it, and it provided a pretty usable oil-lamp wick, so I guess it must
be pretty porous.  A deposit of porous black carbon built up on the
top surface, and the flame is pretty smoky once it gets going, a
process that often involves a certain amount of spluttering.  There’s
a bit of an acid smell to it, like a lit match or the exhaust from
high-sulfur diesel.  I tried sand and vermiculite as alternative wick
materials, which worked much more poorly.  The amount of smoke is high
enough to discourage me from using it in practice, but cutting it to a
better shape might solve that problem, and of course blowing the flame
into a combustion chamber with extra air would solve it.

The microporous nature of the material suggests that it might be
useful for filtering; a major commercial use of the stuff is adsorbing
polar radicals from used frying oil.

One paper describing the synthesis of a magnesium silicate with a
particular molar ratio added the silicate and the magnesium salt
dropwise to a continuously stirred solution of ethanol thickened with
PEG.  I guess the idea was to keep the concentration of unreacted
feedstocks low enough that they would produce a mineral of a
consistent composition.
