Some notes on some things I tried.

02021-07-28
-----------

Pouring sodium silicate solution into concentrated oil of lime hardens
the surface enough that it doesn’t stick to the bottom of the yogurt
cup, and you can pick up the resulting ooze by hand.  Placing the ooze
on a bed of vermiculite and pouring hot construction sand (300°?) over
it produces foamed glass, which grows over a longer period of time
than the foamed glass produced from dried waterglass, but with about
the same density.  However, it sticks to the sand and vermiculite as
it grows.

Having burned through a cotton towel when pouring hot sand previously,
I used a steel wool pad as a hotpad in this case, which worked fine.
Obviously there are drawbacks to using such inflammable materials as
insulating refractory, but in this case it didn’t ignite, and it
worked fine to protect my fingers.

Having melted the aluminum parts of the previous butane-torch nozzle
(the kind that uses 227-gram cans of butane), I bought a somewhat more
robust one from the hardware store for US$6, with no evident aluminum
or plastic parts and no striker.  This can produce a substantially
more exciting flame.

### Borax ###

Bought some 700 g borax from the hardware store for some US$2.  Smells
slightly acidic, suggesting it’s maybe contaminated with boric acid.
It successfully cross-links PVA glue (“plasticola”) into an insoluble
mass.  A hot wire causes it to adhere readily; application of heat
causes it to foam up quite a bit, suggesting that it’s quite hydrated,
and then collapse down into a glassy layer of, presumably, mostly
boria, which seems to be able to mostly dissolve construction sand
when reheated.  This suggests that it really is borax.

Heating the borax on low heat on the stove on some aluminum foil
produces a prodigious amount of white solid foam, similar to the
intumescent foam from sodium silicate (see file `glass-foam.md`),
which can be cut with a hot wire.  A drop of water on this foam has no
immediately obvious effect, but after a few minutes, has dissolved a
hole some 30 mm in diameter.

### Quartz-halogen bulbs ###

The internal bulb in one of these halogen household bulbs can be
heated to an orange heat in the butane torch without any softening,
and even quenching in water does not crack them.  This strongly
suggests that it really is quartz.  Too bad it’s burned out.  These
bulbs are hard to find nowadays, though some vendors have some
remaining stock for under US$1 each, and 150W–500W exterior halogen
floodlights still cost only US$2–US$4.

The replacement headlight bulb I got from an auto parts store (US$3)
has the same behavior, except that I haven’t tried quenching it,
suggesting that it’s also a quartz-halogen bulb.  (Also, the box
carries a pictorial warning against touching the glass.)  This is a
Magneti Marelli “H7 12V 55W PX26d”.  Cold (10°?) it measures some 7Ω
on a shitty multimeter that measures 3Ω short-circuit, demonstrating
why household 240V quartz-halogen bulbs would be better for use as
RTDs.  When reheated to orange-hot, it measures 2Ω but the meter’s
short-circuit resistance has dropped to 1Ω, demonstrating that the
meter is totally inadequate for this purpose.  For heating-element
purposes such a bulb ought to be adequate up to nearly 1000°.

### Pumice and garden stores ###

I bought 10 liters of off-white pumice from the garden store for US$2.
It’s so porous that it floats, but it’s open-cell enough that
sometimes it becomes waterlogged and sinks after a few seconds.  It
seems to weigh about 3.5 kg.  Stone dimensions are on the order of
10–40 mm.  It can be heated to orange heat in the blowtorch without
apparent change.  A hacksaw cuts it almost as easily as wood; a steel
wire can bore a hole through it far more easily than through wood, and
without cracking it in half.  It can be easily sanded on granite or on
other pumice stones, yielding a fine floury dust.

Though there is significant variation, it’s too hard to crush between
my fingers, break with my fingers, or carve with thumbnails in its
default form, though you can drill through it with a bamboo chopstick
and enough effort.  However, heating it to orange heat in the
blowtorch renders it somewhat more fragile (presumably by thermal
shock inducing microfractures), so that it can be broken by hand,
though still not crushed between my fingers.  Simply soaking it in
water does not have such a weakening effect, but quenching it in water
after such heating weakens the stone to an even greater degree.

One stone weighs 6.7 g.  When added to 151.3 g of tap water (including
yogurt cup), the reading was 158.1, a reading of 6.8 g.  Later the
reading was 157.9, and upon depressing it below the surface of the
water with wires, 159.1, suggesting 1.2 cc of volume out of the water,
or some 7.9 cc of total volume.  Upon removing the wet stone from the
water, the reading dropped from 158.0 to 150.2, a difference of 7.8 g,
and the wet stone weighed 7.7 g, suggesting there was 1.05 g of water
in its pore volume.  This suggests a total volume, including pore
volume around 9.0 cc and thus a dry density of 0.74 g/cc.

I stopped by a grow shop and was disappointed to find very little in
the way of pure fertilizers and pesticides, less even than in the
local garden store.

### Carbonates and phosphates of iron ###

The garden-store green vitriol looks quite pure, though clumping
together like a gorgeous green deliquescent thing, but the solution in
tap water is a bit cloudy.  Adding an excess of baking soda produces,
after a while, voluminous green-brown bubbles that grow quite large
and do not pop, overflowing my inadequate yogurt cup.  A gray-green
gritty slime with a smell like metal precipitates; this is probably a
mix of carbonates and hydroxides of iron.  Effervescence continues for
an hour or more; probably boiling the soda first would have avoided
it.  Adding diammonium phosphate fertilizer instead in solid form
produces no visible reaction at first, but upon heating produces a
milky white precipitate, which later proceeds to form convection cells
like those in miso soup.

02021-07-29
-----------

### Iron products ###

Neither of the insoluble iron preparations have defecated to anything
like transparency.  Gravity filtration of the carbonate through a
coffee filter leaves a dark green-brown mud on the filter and a fairly
cloudy filtrate, which defecates.  The mud smells like sulfur or
metal, but the filtrate smells like dust.  A second filtration still
leaves a cloudy filtrate.

The phosphate is instead partly white, partly gray, with some solid
chunks which presumably result from the green vitriol remineralizing
the fertilizer prills without letting them completely dissolve.  It
has a similar metallic/sulfurous smell, and similarly the filtrate
through coffee filters is cloudy.  No ammonia smell is detectable.
Excitingly, some of the phosphate product required a bit of work with
a chopstick to scrape free of the epoxy (?) liner of the aluminum can.
But this may have been because I overheated it when heating the
mixture.  I should maybe recrystallize some of the ammonium phosphate
and figure out some of the stoichiometry.

### Pumice grinding ###

Grinding the surface of the pumice with, for example, bamboo, tends to
make the surface harder and less porous, because it fills the exposed
bubbles with packed powder.  When a hole thus drilled with a bamboo
chopstick has recently broken through, there is greater risk of
breaking the rock by wedging.

### Vendors ###

Nearby vendors selling muriate of lime and similar materials include
Kubra Quimica (JUANMANUELCURRA) in Haedo, ROAL4512404 in Ramos Mejía
(aimed at making cheeses and yogurts), DUROPAVIMENTO in Ciudadela
(aimed at making cheeses), and NAMECO QUIMICA in Villa Bosch (Kaiser
921, 5 km north, doesn’t list products on website), Química Kraff
(KRAFF QUIMICA) in Morón (Av Estanislao Zeballos 1820, “cerca de la
cancha del club dep morón”), Insumos Nahum in Ciudadela, ACUARIO
MAKARIOS in El Palomar (Sargento Cabral 1205?  El Rodeo 1416?),
Isiquim SA (El Rodeo 1355 in El Palomar), Laboratorios Condisal SA in
Lomas del Mirador (Tapalqué 543), Planeta Verde
(TIENDAONLINEPLANETAVERDE) in Tapiales, maybe Distriquím (Soldado
Caballero 8664?), Biosix SA (S. Ortiz 2498, piso 2, Ramos Mejía,
surely the closest, doesn’t list products on website), Victor Eduardo
Simo S.A. at Carlos Tejedor 5345 in Caseros (4750 6644, no website,
Monica Barraza?, magnesium sulfate and fluorescein and phosphoric
acid), Productos Químicos Alcesa) in Haedo (Paraguay 939), Silap
(Sialp? Bacterint?) in Haedo (San Luis 661), Astra SA in Haedo
(Argerich 536), Inquimec S.R.L in Haedo (Inalican 1154), Guillermo
A. Rodríguez (Transquimia Chemist Cia Química) in Haedo (La
Fraternidad 590), Ferar Química (B. Márquez 1235, Loma Hermosa),
Química Morón (Hipólito Yrigoyen 1227, Morón), Productos Químicos SRL
in Morón (H. Yrigoyen 625).  Also there’s an Easy at Juan Bautista
Alberdi 4950 in Caseros.

02021-07-30
-----------

### Muriate of lime ###

Put 108.0 g of water in a 10.9 g cut-off can and started heating it up
gently.  Too bad I don’t have a thermometer.  After heating to boiling
it weighed 117.8 g.  Adding (hopefully anhydrous) muriate of lime it
had all dissolved up to a total weight of 235 g,
so the amount of muriate was also 117 g.  At 282.0 g total
weight some of the crystals remained undissolved, but then did
dissolve, with a weight gain to 287.6 g.  I added more crystals to
322.1 g and a little bit seems undissolved; gentle heating dissolved
them, reducing the weight to 321.9 g.  Adding more crystals to get up
to 341.9 g leaves some crystals undissolved.  Further gentle heating
leaves weight at 341.6 and dissolves all crystals; adding more
crystals to 366.0 g leaves some crystals undissolved at first.
Further gentle heating dissolves all crystals and leaves the weight at
364.1 g; adding more crystals brings the weight to 387.5 g.
Further gentle heating dissolves all crystals and leaves the weight at
385.3 g; I added more crystals to 442.2 g.

And then I gave up.  I think those dissolved too.  I’m letting it cool
now; a thin crust of solid has formed at the surface, preventing
further evaporation.

After a couple of hours, the material in the can has the appearance of
a solid, transparent block, but this is an illusion; once the crust is
broken, the inside can be seen to be a mix of rather jagged crystals
of muriate of lime and warm, syrupy oil of lime, which stick nicely to
the finger.

### NightHawkInLight’s intumescent refractory ###

Now I have borax so I should be able to make resistant carbonizing
intumescent refractory materials.  [One person reports success][1]
with 10 tsp cornstarch, 1 tsp baking soda, 4 tsp PVA glue, and no
extra water.  [NightHawkInLight is reported by WP][2] to have switched
from this recipe to cornstarch, flour, sugar, and borax, which was
less prone to mold; in [his video on the improved formulation][3] he
explains (3'47"):

> I’ve also found an optional ingredient that adds both mold and
> insect resistance, as well as an improvement I did *not* expect,
> which I’ll talk about in a moment.  These are the ingredients i used
> in my improved composition: 40 grams of flour, then 20 grams each of
> corn starch, powdered sugar, and baking soda, combining this
> together with approximately 25 grams of water creates a workable
> dough.
> 
> It may seem like a lousy cookie recipe, but each of these
> ingredients serves a specific and important purpose.  The flour is
> my new binder which holds all the rest of the ingredients
> together. Cornstarch reduces stickiness and allows the putty to
> better hold its shape.  And sugar is the secret to generating a
> carbon foam even when the resulting material is bone dry.
> 
> When heat is applied to my composition, the sugar inside will melt,
> providing elasticity and lubrication between the other chemicals so
> that gas bubbles can form.  Baking soda is the final ingredient,
> which, when heated, releases CO₂ and water, which inflate the carbon
> bubbles and give us our final result: an extremely heat resistant
> putty which can be used as is or dried into solid tiles.
> 
> ... The most obvious weakness to this composition is that it’s very
> edible, both by insects and by mold, so I decided to try adding
> borax to the recipe.  Borax kills most insects that would eat it,
> and also kills mold.  Similar to baking soda, it releases water
> vapor as gas when heated, so borax could replace baking soda in my
> formula entirely.

At this point he shows his notebook with something like eight alternative recipes:

- 5 g baking soda, 10 g borax, 10 g sugar, 5 g corn starch, 25 g
  flour, 5 g diatomaceous earth;
- 50 g corn starch, 25 g erythritol, 25 g ammonium diphosphate [sic] +
  shellac as a possible coating;
- 10 g sugar, 20 g flour, 10 g borax, and “mod + 5 g baking soda”.  A
  second column says that using 10 g flour instead of 20, it was “a
  little melty”.
- On an earlier page, .5 g alum, 2 g iron phos[phate], 2.5 g flour; or
- 3 g iron phos[phate], 1 g urea, 3 g alum, 1 g “cs” (cornstarch?), 16 g
  flour, 2 g sugar; marked “almost as good →” with an arrow pointing to:
- “Best”: 10 g corn starch, 20 g flour, 10 g baking soda (or borax, as
  suggested by a video edit), 10 g powdered sugar, 25 g water for 2×
  batch; one Xed out column instead suggests 10 g corn starch, 50 g
  flour, 20 g baking soda, 20 g powdered sugar; a third column
  suggests 5 g corn starch, 25 g flour, 10 g baking soda, and 10 g
  powdered sugar.  And, finally,
- 1 g “Kno3” (!), 2 g iron II phosphate, 10 g corn starch, 20 g flour,
  10 g sugar, 20 g water.

> The resulting carbon foam [using borax] is slightly less insulating
> to heat, but the added resistance to rot and insects may be
> worthwhile. One discovery that surprised me in my tests with borax
> was that the carbon foam generated by a borax-containing composition
> is significantly stronger physically than any foam I had generated
> before. The hardness, if you can believe it, is about the same as an
> alumina fire brick, which may open some new opportunities for how
> these normally very fragile carbon foams could be used.

[1]: https://www.steampoweredfamily.com/activities/starlite-material-experiments-on-heat-transfer-and-thermal-insulation/
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Starlite#Claimed_replication
[3]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IbWampaEcM

So, I guess I’ll try his recommended recipe: 40 g flour, 20 g corn
starch, 20 g sugar, 20 g borax, and 25 g water.

I mixed:

- 40.2 g 000 white flour (Cañuelas brand)
- 20.4 g borax
- 20.0 g sugar (granulated, Ledesma azúcar común tipo “A”, freely
  flowing and so apparently fairly dry)
- 20.4 g manioc starch (I couldn’t find the cornstarch)
- 37.4 g water (I poured too fast and overshot by 50%)

The total ball of dough was 133.9 g, so I probably lost about 4.5 g
that stuck to the mixing container or my hands or whatever.  It
smelled like cookie dough and had a tendency to kind of slump,
probably due to having too much water.  I was able to use it to cover
the inside of a Monster can with the ends cut off and heat the can
from the inside with the hand butane torch, and it did indeed foam up
and produce an aroma similar to burnt toast and a carbon foam similar
in hardness to insulating firebrick.

After letting the can cool, I turned the flame back on and ran it
through the can again while holding it between my fingers; after about
30 seconds, the can became too hot to hold comfortably.

I heated up a small, thin piece (initially on a bed of waterglass
foam, then inside the Monster-can “forge”) to see if I could cook it
thoroughly into foam to get some kind of read on its material
properties.  During this process I noticed a second objectionable
feature of this composition, aside from the burnt-toast smoke: it has
a tendency to continue to smolder for a while after the source of heat
is removed.  (I wrapped the piece in aluminum foil to put it out
without wetting it.)  Also, significant cracks were opening up in the
lining of the Monster can, although they seem to have been exposing
uncooked dough rather than unprotected aluminum.

After all that, the piece turned out to be under 100 mg and so too
small for my shitty scale to weigh, even when wet.  It floated in
water mostly below the surface, similar to the pumice, but it’s hard
to tell how much of that is a question of water absorption.

In terms of fragility, it is definitely less fragile than the
waterglass foam, and definitely more fragile than pumice.

Heating some more of this stuff with he blowtorch on top of the
waterglass foam, I notice that each little black particle has a little
crater around it in the waterglass foam, like snow around de-icing
salt on a sidewalk.  This suggests that either the carbon particles
are producing heat to melt the waterglass around them, for example by
burning (quite possible), or that the borax in them is fluxing the
waterglass foam and allowing it to soften and collapse at a lower
temperature (also possible).

One of the resulting chunks of carbon foam ranges from 15 mm in
thickness to 25 mm in length and weighs 1.0 g.

Density measurement: I placed a 64.5 g cup of water on the scale.
Immersing the foam in it beneath the surface with chopsticks yielded a
reading of 68.1 g; removing it produced a reading of 61.8 g; weighing
the foam separately yielded 3.7; immersing it a second time produced a
reading of 67.8; weighing it a second time produced a weight of 4.0; a
final weighing of the cup produced a reading of 61.4.  Apparently in
the first immersion it absorbed 2.7 g of water (both the difference in
the foam and in the water), having displaced 3.6 cc of water; after
the second immersion it had absorbed 3.0–3.1 g of water and was
displacing 3.3 cc of water.  So its total volume was 6.3 cc, including
both the pore spaces that filled with water and those that excluded
water, but not including spaces from which the water drained
immediately upon removal.  This is a pretty reasonable volume, given
that 15 mm × 20 mm × 25 mm would have been 7.5 cc, and the shape was
quite irregular.  So the density of the foam as such is about
0.16 g/cc.

The water in this process turned dirty brown and had lots of black
crap floating in it, so presumably there was a significant amount of
lost mass.  On soaking the foam a little longer, the water turned
quite black.

After driving the water off from the foam that hasn’t dissolved with
the torch, it weighed 800 mg, so only about 20% was lost.

I’ve flattened out a remaining piece of the dough to let it air-dry so
that I can test its intumescent properties after drying.

### Waterglass and starch intumescent refractory ###

It occurs to me that a 1:1 molar ratio of carbon sources such as
cornstarch with silicon sources such as waterglass might be able to
produce a foam that is partly or wholly carborundum (melting point
2830°), which would have mechanical and oxidation-resistance
properties superior to carbon foam, and mechanical and melt-resistance
properties superior to silicate glass foams.  Boron carbide B₄C would
probably be superior (harder than carborundum, softer only than CBN
and diamond) but I think it’s probably even harder to produce than
carborundum; Moissan’s original synthesis involved heating boria with
carbon over the melting point of boron carbide, 2763°, though
apparently magnesium permits the reaction under much less violent
conditions.

Mixing a little waterglass with manioc starch produces a mixture with
the consistency of warm chewing gum; I kept adding starch and kneading
it in until it seemed like adding more starch would make it fall
apart.  (But I don’t know whether this is 1:3, 1:1, 3:1, or what.)
The resulting rubbery, doughy substance is intumescent under the
flame, producing a black foam with similar strength to that of the
borax-based recipe above, though perhaps with a smaller cell size,
but, as I was hoping, this foam has no tendency to smolder.  Also,
perhaps unsurprisingly, it stuck rather tightly to the foamed
waterglass bed I was trying to heat it on, which the carbon/borax foam
did not.  I’ve left a fragment of this composition also to dry.  While
intumescing it produced a scent vaguely reminiscent of pine pitch,
which strikes me as slightly alarming.

Both this foam and the waterglass-free version can be very readily cut
with a hacksaw.

### Waterglass, borax, and starch intumescent refractory ###

It occurred to me that maybe borax would be compatible with
waterglass, and indeed you can mix quite a lot of borax and water into
this waterglass solution without coagulating it in the way calcium or
magnesium ions do.  (I was concerned that perhaps the borate ions
would be sufficiently amphiphilic to cross-link the silicate, but
apparently not.)  Mixing up manioc starch as before with this mixture
produces another white doughy mixture which produces intumescent black
foam when heated — though there are also bits of white foam, which may
have been undissolved borax crystals.  I’ve left a couple of these
samples also to dry and see how they behave.  One I heated
immediately; it also has the unnerving pine-resin smell, and the foam
it produces is the hardest yet — I can barely carve it with my
thumbnail.  I ran out of butane for the torch in the process, so I
heated the sample for a longer period of time on the kitchen stove’s
gas flame.  Hacksawing through it reveals that although it has foamed
up throughout its thickness, only the outermost 5 mm charred, leaving
an inner circle of white uncharred material separated from the
fissured outer carbon foam by a brown ring.

As with the waterglass/starch mix, the foam shows no tendency to
smolder.

I can still break this foam material by hand, but it is hard enough
that I cannot crush it between my fingers.  Taking a 12-mm-diameter
bit of it that weighs in at 0.65 g, I tried repeating the earlier
density measurement but screwed up my measurements; I think the water
weighs 81.9 g after pulling the wet foam out, 83.6 with it immersed,
and the wet foam weighs 1.6 g.  Or maybe it’s 80.7 g after the foam is
removed.  So it absorbed 0.95 g of water and displaced 1.7–2.9 g,
which is really a damned wide range, so its volume including pores is
2.65–3.85 cc.  Which is totally impossible, because (12mm)³ =
1.728 cc, so it’s somewhere in the range 0.17–0.72 g/cc.  Not a good
measurement by any stretch of the imagination.  All you can say is
that it floats if it’s dry.  It turns out that it floats if it’s wet,
too, barely, so I guess it’s below 0.4 g/cc dry.

So, I’ll have to redo the test with a larger piece, maybe after I get
more butane.

The part of the foam that has been entirely charred is dramatically
more fragile than the part that hasn’t.

It’s too bad I didn’t weigh out the ingredients, because this
formulation in particular would have been pretty great to be able to
reproduce.

I think the torch I’m using doesn’t get as hot as the torch I
melted — it’s more for heating larger areas — so I haven’t been able
to get any of these samples above orange heat.  It’ll be good to be
able to verify that they don’t lose structural integrity at higher
temperatures due to, say, too much borax, too much waterglass, or too
much thermal expansion.

The waterglass-based samples I’ve left to dry seem to be leaching
waterglass out the bottom.

02021-07-31
-----------

The unfired waterglass bodies have hardened noticeably.  Also, two of
them have split, evidently from contracting as the surface dried.

I heated up one of them on the stove flame; it bubbled up pretty much
as before.

Made a giant cookie using the flour/starch/sugar recipe, this time
using baking soda instead of borax (of course), and adding some oil
and vanilla.  Also I added too much water, so I’m frying it in a
skillet instead of baking it.  First conclusion is that this is far
too much leavening for a cookie or pancake.  After cooking, it was
even more inedible than beforehand; the surface caramelized to the
point of being too bitter to eat.  I discarded most of it, retaining a
piece for future torch testing.  Also, I keep belching from the
uncooked batter I ate.  The kitchen definitely smells more appetizing
and less alarming now, though.

Grupo Ecoquimica at Avenida de Mayo 1761 in Ramos Mejía has zinc oxide
(AR$4500/kg), epsom salt (AR$220/kg), mesh-80 calcium carbonate
(AR$80/kg), borax (AR$220/kg), alum (AR$630/kg), citric acid
(AR$290/kg), sulfur (AR$300/kg), bentonite (AR$50/kg), glycerin
(AR$500/kg), kaolin (AR$150/kg), magnesium chloride (AR$210/kg),
dipropylene glycol (AR$528/kg, see file `dipropylene-glycol.md`), soy
lecithin (AR$600/kg), cerium oxide (AR$13200/kg), boric acid
(AR$275/kg), copper sulfate (AR$880/kg), titanium dioxide
(AR$2100/kg), electrode gel (AR$360/kg), talc (AR$200/kg), infusorial
earth (AR$167/kg), etc.  Generally they sell in units of around
AR$300-AR$500, so for most materials the limiting factor would be how
much I could carry.  It’s a few km away.  Kubra and Insumos Nahum have
propylene glycol, these guys don’t, just dipropylene glycol.

Oh, and it looks like the place I bought muriate of lime at the
beginning of the pandemic was Química Industrial Caseros, at Bartolomé
Mitre 4405 in Caseros, which is at the intersection with Lisandro de
la Torre, which intersects Alvear at Día, not where I had thought.  So
that’s why I didn’t find it the other day when I went walking up that
way: I was a few blocks off.

02021-08-02
-----------

Bought a new can of butane/propane for AR$340 (US$1.90).

The dried inedible pancake fragment, with its extra sugar and oil, and
with baking soda instead of borax, can not only smolder but sustain a
flame for a while after the torch is removed.  Also, it evidently
softens enough to deflect noticeably while the torch is on it.

The other dried/hardened samples (waterglass with starch, waterglass
with starch and borax, flour/sugar/starch/borax) all produce hard
intumescent foams as before.  The waterglass-based samples don’t
smolder.

The massive waterglass/starch/borax sample cracked in a few places on
the outside as its crust shrank while drying.

02021-08-06
-----------

I ground up a spoonful of some diammonium phosphate fertilizer using
scraps of granite as grindstones, noting an objectionable ammonia
odor; sprinkled it onto some construction sand, previously dried with
a torch, atop a bed of vermiculite; ground up a spoonful of what I
believe to be some aluminum hydroxide, and sprinkled it on top; and
heated the whole lot with the torch for a while.  I never reached an
orange heat for the whole mass, but the fertilizer did bubble out
quite a bit of ammonia, and I often reached an orange heat for the
surface.  At one point I stopped, and the large amount of ammonia that
began to escape persuaded me that stopping had been a bad idea, so I
flambéd the mass a while longer until it stopped bubbling, about 10 or
20 minutes.

Upon cooling, I had a somewhat porous and brittle but surprisingly
strong and hard crust of white material.  It did not show any
water-solubility or acid or base reaction (that is, upon dripping
vinegar on it and letting the vinegar sit for a while, baking soda
sprinkled on it would bubble, so it did not neutralize the vinegar;
but upon being wetted with water, baking soda sprinkled on it would
not bubble, so it did not neutralize the baking soda either.)

It’s probably worth making some better aluminum hydroxide, and trying
the three pairwise combinations of the fertilizer, the construction
sand, and the aluminum hydroxide.

At this point, despite this process having produced some ammonia and
presumably a significant quantity of nitrogen oxides, my lungs were
feeling fine.  I tried heating a piece of the aluminum phosphate (?)
crust thus formed by blowing the torch through the Monster-can “forge”
with the borax/flour/etc. insulation described earlier to see if I
could get it to a higher temperature and maybe melt it.  I did get it
to bubble a bit more, but it didn’t seem to melt bodily.  After
heating it in this way for several minutes, the intumescent insulation
was smoldering pretty enthusiastically, and in places was peeling away
from the can; after removing the gas flame, it sustained a flame for
under a minute, then went back to smoldering.  This left the house
full of smoke that smelled like burnt toast and left my lungs feeling
shitty.

I should probably use one of the non-smoldering, waterglass-based
intumescent recipes.

02021-08-07
-----------

Still no water-solubility evident from the scrap of aluminum phosphate
(?) in water.

Mina’s impression of the phosphate material was that it felt like a
“fragment of wall”, that is, fully hardened portland-cement concrete
that has exfoliated (maybe because it was improperly adhered stucco).
That seems about right, but I think it might be slightly harder than
that.

02021-08-08
-----------

I mixed some one-component hardware-store silicone (3M 420
*transparente, vidrios y ventanas* ) with the borax, then mixed by
hand, adding more borax until it seemed like it was going to fall
apart, to get a translucent ball some 25 mm in diameter, around 00:40.
I poked and prodded it to see if it had become elastic or was still
just visco-.

The borax is, I think, too coarsely ground to keep the silicone from
being sticky; so I got sticky silicone all over my fingers, despite
initial attempts to avoid this by using polyethylene bags as gloves.
At least I seem to have avoided getting major skin irritation from the
acetic acid.  I was hoping for more of an Oogoo-style effect, but I
realize that I ① haven’t made Oogoo and ② probably would need to have
the borax finely ground.  The idea at any rate was that maybe the
water of crystallization of the borax would serve as a hydroxyl source
for the silicone polymerization, allowing it to harden all the way
through like Oogoo, and then maybe if the resulting object was heated,
the borate would form a borosilicate network with the silicone
backbones of the polymers.  That evidently didn’t happen.

At 01:00 the ball was still pretty visco- and not very elastic, but at
least it wasn’t sticking to my fingers anymore.  Likewise at 01:24.
The temperature in here is probably around 15°.  By 07:30 the ball was
mostly returning to its initial shape after being squished, and no
longer cracking apart.  My impression is that this is very similar to
the behavior it would have if I had mixed in sand instead of
borax — if it didn’t stick to the sand at all.

(Unfortunately I didn’t bother to note whether it had an acetic-acid
smell at the time.)

I’ve been thinking about how to make these tests more rigorous, having
just read Kingery’s earthshaking dissertation on phosphate-bonded
refractories from 01950; right now I can’t even reliably tell if one
mix is twice as strong or weak as another, or contains twice as much
sand.  It would be great to be able to do quantitative compressive and
flexural strength tests, for example, which would require being able
to cast bars of reproducible dimensions and fire them at reproducible
temperatures.  The tests mentioned previously with the phosphate
fertilizer involved training a somewhat inconstant butane torch on
some material until it stopped bubbling, which took about 20 minutes.

Doing this in a consistent fashion is going to involve setting up some
kind of kiln that can maintain a reproducible temperature, for
probably considerably longer than 20 minutes, since the temperature
has to penetrate to the center of the bar instead of just a
millimeter-thick layer.  See file `pocket-kiln.md` for thoughts on
this.

Also, it would probably be useful to pre-purify the phosphate
fertilizer, maybe using that recrystallization protocol by that
African research group.  And maybe pre-dissociating it to get 99%
crystalline phosphoric acid would be useful for non-intumescent
recipes, and also eliminate the problems associated with ammonia
emissions.  The phosphoric acid would have to be carefully granulated,
though, to prevent it from being a serious inhalation hazard, and if
it overheated (past 42.35°, assuming no freezing point depression from
impurities) it would glom together into just a sticky mass.  And I
don’t have a prilling tower.

02021-08-09
-----------

Attempted to repeat the production of the apparent aluminum phosphate
without success.  I suspect the sand may have been wet enough to keep
the temperature too low, but stoichiometry is another possible
culprit.  This time I had four areas heated to orange heat at
different times: nothing (just construction sand), possible aluminum
hydroxide, possible aluminum hydroxide with diammonium phosphate, and
just diammonium phosphate.  The grey aluminum compound remained inert
to the heat in both cases; the phosphate bubbled orange as before, but
only produced a cemented mass in the place where it was alone on the
sand, not where it was mixed with the aluminum compound.  This time,
though, the cemented mass was acidic and black, and produced an acid
gas while being flambéd.  The aluminum compound looked for all the
world as if no phosphate had ever been there.  The phosphate flames
were tinted green, a phenomenon I could barely see and hadn’t noticed
before.

The waterglass+borax+starch pieces I’d made previously have become
brittle and fragile as they dried out; I can break a massive (12mm)
bar of it with my thumb, and upon dropping another piece on the floor
it broke.  Also, one piece that had initially hardened on a piece of
PET is off-white on the air side and pure white on the plastic side,
suggesting that the water accumulation I’d observed on that side led
to a permanent compositional difference, perhaps the dissolution of all the
borax.  However, they haven’t developed visible cracks, and they still
form an intumescent refractory foam upon flaming.  It smolders for a
few seconds upon flame removal, though, and upon continued flaming the
foam melts somewhat; this suggests both that the composition doesn’t
contain enough waterglass to suppress smoldering entirely, and that it
doesn’t contain enough carbon to form a continuous carbon network that
can remain solid even when the silicate network melts.

This probably suggests that I should consider using way less borax in
these mixes.  [WP says][0] non-alkaline-earth borosilicate glass is
12–13% boria, alkaline-earth types are 8–12% boria and 5% alkaline
earths and alumina, and high-borate types are 15–25% boria with lower
amounts of alkaline earths and alumina, the remainder being silica in
all cases.  So even a small amount of borax is probably adequate.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borosilicate_glass#Non-alkaline-earth_borosilicate_glass_%28borosilicate_glass_3.3%29

02021-08-10
-----------

I attempted to make three crude pieces of pumice flat by rubbing them
together by hand for about 20 minutes, without external abrasives.
The resulting deviations from flatness over distances of some 30 mm
were on the order of 1 mm.  In one of the three cases this was large
enough to easily detect by touch, which seems to be due to an embedded
hard stone; the other two look and feel flat (except for bubbles),
even in glancing light, until you test them against a really flat
surface.  A great deal of white pumice flour covered the floor, its
adherent nature posing difficulties for broom cleanup; also, it is
slightly gritty between the teeth.  Some of it has gotten into my
keyboard and mouse buttons.

I filled a plastic shopping bag with methane, but to my disappointment
it did not rise into the air, though it did burn nicely, leaving an
unobjectionable candle-wax aroma.  On calculation it seems to be about
a sixteenth of the required volume.  See file `methane-bag.md`.

02021-08-12
-----------

The borax silicone from four days ago is rubbery all the way through.
Washing it in water reveals that it is spongy and hydrophobic; drops
of water can be squeezed out of its void spaces and bead up on the
surface; evidently the water is washing the borax out of internal
spaces, so it’s like a silicone sponge.  Upon washing it in 95%
ethanol instead, gritty borax comes out on my hands; a drop of water
immediately dissolves it away into slippery wetness, confirming that
it’s borax, or at least something alkaline.  Cutting it in half with a
razor knife makes some white noise as the knife encounters hard grains
and leaves crystalline grains of borax on the razor knife and the
exposed surfaces; they dissolve immediately in water.  So on one hand
there seems to be no uncured silicone, as desired, but on the other
hand the borate mostly doesn’t seem to have been available to interact
with the silicone.  I suspect that probably I used enough crystalline
borax to make the silicone effectively an open-cell foam, with the
pores full of borax, perhaps allowing moisture from the air to
penetrate.  I can’t smell any acetic acid smell, but it *has* been
four days.  Perhaps a better-controlled version of the experiment
would put the silicone and borax inside an airtight membrane, such as
a party balloon or ziploc bag; this would prevent acetic acid from
escaping or moisture from entering.

I mixed some Oogoo in the same way with cassava starch and the same
silicone, inside a pair of polyethylene shopping bags.  It never did
reliably stop being sticky; when there was enough starch on the
surface it would be nonsticky, but sufficient kneading would make it
sticky again.  I have left it to possibly harden.  I was hoping I
could mix it by kneading the inner shopping bag from outside, but
instead I got silicone all over my fingers, which I washed off with
dish detergent and water.  No skin irritation was evident four days
ago, and none is evident now.

After sitting for a while, its surface stopped being sticky at all;
further kneading made it a little sticky again, but I didn’t continue
kneading long enough to see if it returned to its original stickiness.
I just rolled it back into a ball.

A few hours later (4?) the Oogoo thing had thoroughly solidified into
a non-sticky smooth white rubber ball, which bounced nicely.  Slicing
it with the razor knife revealed that it was solidified all the way
through (30–35 mm), so the cassava starch did succeed in avoiding the
standard problem with household one-component silicone where it only
cures in a very thin layer.  It still has a noticeable smell of acetic
acid.

Even though it’s cured all the way through, it’s still noticeably
viscoelastic.

It easily sustains a flame once ignited.  Burning it thoroughly with a
butane torch converted it to a fragile carbon foam slightly larger
than the original rubber, with the surface converted to a white ash,
and produced a slight annoying smell of acid.  The vermiculite near
where it was burned received a gray deposit from the fumes.  I wet
three of the vermiculite stones in a (not pure polypropylene) bottle
cap with a drop of water; baking soda then added did not fizz.  So
whatever the gray stuff is, it’s not noticeably acidic in water.

02021-08-13
-----------

In the end my lungs hurt for about an hour last night from, I guess,
the smoke from the burning silicone.

[The 3M 420 silicone I’ve been using costs AR$310 for 280 g][1a], which
at AR$180/US$ is US$1.72, or US$6.15/kg.  The bisected ball from the
other day weighs 19.0 g, probably half of which is cassava starch
(AR$190/kg or US$1.05/kg), so this ball cost about AR$3 of material.

We have a glass microwave turntable we’ve been using as a plate, but
it’s not very stable (it tends to tilt one way or the other, or spin
around the middle, because it has three little glass projections near
the center) so I’ve cut part of the ball into three little feet and
glued them onto the bottom with more of the silicone.  We’ll see if
that works.

[1a]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-925860962-silicona-acetica-universal-420-3m-280gr-transparente-_JM

The Monster can of muriate of lime I dissolved/melted on 02021-07-30
has finally accumulated an appreciable amount of liquid on its surface
by dehydrating the air.

At about 21:15, in one plastic shopping bag I put about 12.0 g cassava
starch and 23.2 g silicone and kneaded them together through the bag,
which produced a mass too sticky to remove from the bag; in another I
similarly mixed 11.8 g silicone with 21.5 g starch, but despite
extensive kneading I cannot get it to cohere into a single mass.  It
just acts like slightly damp cornstarch, easily crumbling away.  I
can’t smell the acetic acid anymore, but I have the impression that
the lower-silicone crumbly version had a lot less acetic aroma to it
at the time.

So I think the silicone-to-starch ratio has to be pretty close to 1:1;
neither 2:1 nor 1:2 works well.  I might try a third batch where I
start with a ball of silicone in a vast oversupply of starch, then
progressively knead in more starch, then measure how much starch
remains unincorporated once I’ve produced a reasonable product.  That
seems like it might work better than trying to knead it through the
bag.  Like how you flour your hands when kneading bread.

After an hour and a half, though, at 22:47, I can peel the 12g-starch,
23.2-g silicone mix off the bag and roll it into a ball, which weighs
30.2 g out of the 35.2 g originally placed.  So there’s probably about
5.0 g of silicone (and starch) still stuck to the bag that I didn’t
manage to peel off.  The ball is still annoyingly sticky to the touch.
I can smell the acetic acid again, and it’s sort of chokingly strong.

After another half hour, at 23:13, the ball is no longer fully
plastic; it tends to return to its original form after even fairly
extreme deformations, so it is no longer kneadable.  If this is
typical behavior it’s fairly annoying: it went from annoyingly sticky
on the hands half an hour ago to unworkable now.  I wonder if a larger
amount of starch would mitigate this behavior, because the ball last
night was a lot more kneadable when reasonably unsticky.  But maybe I
just got lucky?

My fingers sure do feel smooth.

I mixed some more sodium silicate (waterglass)
with cassava starch on another
shopping bag to form a dough, which I tried to use to form a little
pocket oven.  This was unsuccessful, as over the following 20 minutes
the oven gradually slumped down into a flat object; evidently sodium
silicate with cassava starch behaves as a very viscous fluid, not a
viscoelastic solid.  Maybe gelatinizing the starch first would help.

I flambéd a small piece of it with the butane torch.  It produced a
little bit of smoke, which smelled like pine pitch — Mina reported
that it smelled like mentholated wood.  Upon long flaming it was able
to remain smoldering for a few seconds after the flame source was
removed, but not sustain a flame on its own.  The carbonizing stuff
swelled up like a sopaipilla in the torch flame.  I was mostly able to
hold it just in my fingers even though it was only a few cm long; at
some points I resorted to needlenose pliers, which broke through the
surface and exposed the hollow interior.

Mina reports that the sodium silicate bottle has a very strong smell
resembling that of toilet cleaner (the kind based on muriatic acid),
one which provoked nausea.  I can’t smell anything from it, but I
suppose there must be a lot of hydroxyls flying around if she can.

In between the hydroxyls from the sodium silicate, the acetic acid
from the Oogoo, and the pine-scented smoke from the intumescent, we’re
both kind of clearing our throats a lot.

By 00:00 the Oogoo seemed to be fully hardened but of course still
preserves a quite strong acetic-acid aroma.  I stuck a hardened steel
shaft through it.

To estimate the water content of the liquid that had formed on the
muriate salt, I took a shiny steel bowl (nickel-plated?) weighing
42.3 g and poured the salt solution out of the Monster can, bringing
the weight to 47.3 g, so about 5.0 g of liquid had formed.  Then I
heated the bowl on the stove until it was apparently just dry white
deposits of muriate of lime, though a little hissing was still
audible.  At this point the bowl weighed 45.0 g, so only about 2.7 g
of muriate of lime remained; 2.3 g of water had boiled away.  (Also, a
little bit had been thrown out of the bowl by the violent sizzling
bubbling — white specks were visible all around the rim of the bowl,
so some must have also overshot.)  After strongly heating the bowl on
the stove a few minutes more, bringing parts of its floor to red heat
while covering the top of it partly with aluminum foil, turning parts
of the shiny nickel (?) black, producing a strong smell of metal, it
still weighed 45.0 g, so if more water was lost, it was compensated by
oxidation of the bowl.  After washing the bowl with water, during
which a bunch of the black stuff came off onto my fingers (NiCl₂?  But
that would be green and water-soluble.  CrCl₃?  Would be purple (but
maybe I wouldn’t notice the difference)) and drying it, the bowl
weighed 42.2 g, so evidently there wasn’t a lot of oxidation going on,
so probably the white stuff from when it boiled dry was pretty much
just the anhydrous salt, as you’d expect.

That would mean 2.3 g of water was enough to hydrate and dissolve
2.7 g of anhydrous muriate of lime, so something is clearly wrong
here!  According to file `shower-heating-tces.md` the solid
hexahydrate should weigh 219.07/110.98 of the anhydrate form, or
5.3 g/2.7 g, so 2.6 g of water should have been required just to get
to the hexahydrate.  Moreover Wikipedia says the hexahydrate only
dissolves 81.1 g per 100 mℓ of water at 25°, so to dissolve those
5.3 g we should have needed 11.9 g of total solution, another 6.6 g of
water, or more at temperatures below 25°.  It’s definitely cold enough
here for the hexahydrate to solidify.

I’m not sure where my error is exactly.  The Wikipedia numbers predict
that 11.9 g of saturated hexahydrate solution should have been
required to boil down to 2.7 g, not 5.0 g.  Given how exactly the
scale was able to reproduce previous measurements, it hardly seems
likely that it had a 6.9 g error in measuring the weight of the
solution I dripped into it, even if maybe it does have a little bit of
silicone on the table under it.  It measures the blob of Oogoo at
30.8 g, the one it measured as 30.2 g a few hours ago, but also I
think a little more Oogoo got stuck to the ball after I initially
weighed it.  Maybe this stuff isn’t really muriate of lime — but then,
what else *could* it be?

I should probably see whether, say, 20 g of salt from the bag loses
mass if I heat it to red heat, and then how much water it takes to
start to dissolve it at room temperature, which should tell me how
much mass the hexahydrate has.

Interestingly, when I pulled the shaft out of the Oogoo to weigh it,
it left a perfectly round hole through the middle of the blob.  I
guess it’s still flowing a little bit (or creeping a lot, depending on
how you look at it).  It’s 01:22, and I’ve stuck the original shaft
back in, and I’m sticking a second shaft through it to see if the hole
*it* made remains open, or round, when I pull it out tomorrow.

02021-08-14
-----------

It took a couple of hours for the respiratory irritation to die down.

The Oogoo is noticeably harder this afternoon.  The second shaft left
a hole smaller than the first, about half the diameter (maybe 1mm
instead of 2mm; the calipers say the shafts are 2.94–2.98 mm, so I
think that even the first hole is smaller than the shaft that made
it); I’ve taken both shafts out and inserted one of them to make a
third hole.  It still smells of acetic acid.

The waterglass starch dough has mostly hardened in the position I left
it in.  It occurred to me that last night it was flowing liquidly when
left alone for long periods of time, while breaking brittlely when I
tried to form it rapidly, which is pretty much the shear-thickening
behavior you’d expect for a suspension of starch in water, just at
lower flow rates.

We found a stone mortar that had been missing.  It was in the kitchen
cabinet.  Unfortunately, vinegar testing on the bottom shows that it’s
marble, not agate, so it will contaminate anything ground in it with
marble dust.  Nevertheless I will grind some of the borax.  Agate
mortars are [available for around US$800][2a], which seems excessive
when a [chunk of agate of the right size is only US$30][3a].

[2a]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-897289502-juego-de-mortero-y-maja-de-agata-cole-parmer-4-75-ml-_JM
[3a]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-744508347-piedra-agata-en-bruto-natural-art517-_JM

I used the mortar to grind some borax to a mostly flour-like
consistency.  I weighed it into the same bowl I used yesterday, which
now weighs 42.3 g; after taring the bowl, the borax weighs 52.5 g.  I
took a Nutella jar which weighs 30.2 g; upon adding the borax, it
weighs 82.6 g, giving a 52.4 g weight of finely ground borax.  I’d
probably need to screen the borax to separate out the remaining large
crystals I missed in the grinding.

The borax tastes like baking soda (something I haven’t been brave
enough to try previously) but does not bubble in vinegar.  After
adding vinegar to it, baking soda that is added still fizzes, but very
slowly, which is consistent with the borax having converted the
vinegar into sodium acetate and much weaker boric acid.

To try Oogoo with a little of this new finer borax, I mixed 10.2 g of
cassava starch with 0.5 g of this flour-ground borax in the bowl, then
transferred it to a shopping bag.  In another bag, I mixed 10.3 g of
cassava starch with 2.0 g of the same borax.  To the shopping bag with
the 0.5 g of borax I added 10.4 g of the same silicone; to the other
bag with the 2.0 g of borax I added 13.2 g.  In both cases I smooshed
them around by kneading them through the bag until they seemed pretty
uniform.  Now it’s 01:48 by the laptop clock.

The idea is that the borax may do one or more of: provide borate ions
that cross-link the silicone to make it harder; neutralize the acetic
acid into sodium acetate, converting the borax itself into relatively
inert boric acid, thus reducing the annoying outgassing; or release
extra water, speeding the acetic cure.  And by being more finely
ground, maybe it will work better for these things than last time, and
also not add so much porosity to the final material as my first borax
silicone test on 02021-08-08.

At only 01:56 (8 minutes later) the two Oogoo batches are noticeably
harder.  I can already peel them off the bags.  The ball from the
other bag (with 2.0 g of borax) weighs 25.8 g, rather than the
2+13.2+10.3=25.5 g expected, suggesting a weighing error.  The ball
from the shopping bag weighs 20.9 g rather than the
0.5+10.4+10.2=21.1 g expected.  I think I left more of the silicone
stuck to the very thin shopping bag because it was harder to peel the
bag away from the silicone, perhaps because it was much more wrinkly.
But I guess it probably wasn’t more than about 3%.

It’s 02:09 now, 21 minutes after initial mixing, and the two chunks of
Oogoo are very moldable and kneadable and still kind of annoyingly
sticky, but at least they’re not leaving chunks of silicone stuck all
over my fingers any more.  They both have a strong acetic acid smell.
So far, there’s no evidence that the borax has had any effect.  That
does sort of mean that it was ground finely enough to eliminate the
obvious grittiness I had in the first borax silicone test.  I took
advantage of the kneadability to fold each one in half 20 times to mix
them more homogeneously.

At 02:20, 32 minutes after initial mixing, they’re still very moldable
and kneadable, and noticeably less sticky.  The two versions seem
pretty identical though.  Most of the acetic-acid smell seems to be
gone from the shopping-bag ball, the one with only 0.5 g of borax.
Both balls look wet when being left without kneading for a few
minutes, suggesting that the silicone is smoothing out rough surfaces
with viscous flow.  Kneading makes them look dry for a little while.

I think I’ll try kneading some construction sand into part of one of
the balls.  I dried some sand in the bowl, which weighed 70.7 g with
the dry sand, and thus this is about 28.4 g of sand.  I’m pulling off
about half the other-bag ball, 11.9 of 25.8 g of Oogoo.  After having
kneaded in sand to 21.4 g (presumably 9.5 g of sand) it was starting
to have noticeably less structural integrity, but I managed to
incorporate essentially all the sand and still have a brown plastic
mass weighing 39.0 g.  I must have lost about 1.3 g of sand along the
way.  Mina commented that it felt like whole-wheat flour.

As plastic molding compounds go, this sand mix is not quite as cheap
as pottery clay, but it’s probably watertight once it hardens at room
temperature, and it wouldn’t be surprising if it were enormously more
impact-resistant as well, though weaker and softer.  The proportions
are, I think:

10.3 g cassava starch × 11.9/25.8 = 4.8 g (12%)  
2.0 g borax × 11.9/25.8 = 0.92 g (2.4%)   
13.2 g silicone × 11.9/25.8 = 6.1 g (16%)  
27.1 g sand (70%)  
39.0 g total  

1 kg of the stuff would cost 2.1¢ for the sand (US$0.03/kg according
to file `refractories.md`), 98¢ for the silicone, 7¢ for the borax at
US$3/kg, and 12¢ for the cassava starch, for a total of US$1.19/kg.

It’s now 02:52 by my laptop clock.  It’s still possible to fold the
Oogoo over on itself an arbitrary number of times, but there’s
noticeably more resistance, and quite a bit of elasticity, where it
tends to return partway to its previous form.  So at 64 minutes past
initial mixing it’s already past its prime for molding.

02021-08-15
-----------

My hands and upper respiratory system were a little irritated last
night; some of my fingers itched.  I suspect exposure to acetic acid
exacerbated by a lot of handwashing was to blame.

It’s 19:17.

All three Oogoo samples from last night are fairly hard, as rubbers
go.  The sand-filled silicone is noticeably harder than the other two,
which otherwise seem pretty similar.  An acetic-acid smell is evident
from all three.

Attempting to cut the sand-filled silicone with a razor knife quickly
destroy the knife, within a few millimeters.  I think that if I were
to push it hard enough I could probably get it to keep cutting,
because I can cut the stuff with my thumbnail.  However, it’s rubbery
enough that when I let go of the cut piece, it flaps back into place.
Note that this is very different from the behavior I predicted for
sand-filled silicone on 02021-08-08, when the borax didn’t stick to
the silicone.

The sand-filled silicone definitely wets with water better than the
other silicones.  I haven’t measured a contact angle or anything,
though.  When heated up to 100° in a boiling-water bath, it wets
completely with water.

At 19:55, I’ve been boiling the sand-filled silicone for about half an
hour.  It seems slightly changed: the surface feels slimy and leaves a
slimy substance on the fingers, and it no longer smells of vinegar.
But it feels about as hard as before.

I think the seal made between the 2.94-mm ground hardened steel shaft
and the 2-mm-or-so hole it made in the 02021-08-13 Oogoo (2 hours and
45 minutes after being mixed) amounts to a usable sliding seal.  It’s
easy to spin the shaft with the fingers when it’s pressed through the
silicone, and I’m reasonably sure that the hydrophobic nature of the
silicone would keep water from sneaking past it.  You’d want to use a
thinner silicone washer in practice than the 30+ mm.  A casual test
with a drop of water on the slice of that block of Oogoo suggests that
this would work, but of course that doesn’t tell us anything about how
much pressure the seal could withstand.

Mina discovered that the Oogoo from 02021-08-13 is capable of erasing
pencil marks from paper, much to my surprise.  In fact, it seems to
work better than a normal pencil eraser, although the graphite remains
on the surface of the silicone instead of being carried away in
crumbs.  But getting the stuff to flake off in crumbs is presumably
just a matter of adding enough of some kind of friable filler or
filler with poor adhesion to the silicone, like the borax-filled
silicone on 02021-08-08 that ended up making a fragile sponge.

At 20:22 the sand-filled silicone has been out of the boiling water
for nearly half an hour but still feels wet.  I suspect I gelatinized
the remaining starch in its surface layer, and that’s now retaining
water, and smears off on your fingers when you rub it on them.  Rubbed
on a wine bottle, it leaves a visible smear which does not wipe off
with a dry paper towel, but does wipe off with a wet one, suggesting
that it is indeed some kind of water-soluble thing like gelatinized
starch.  It still feels the same way another hour later, at 21:31.  I
wonder if it will grow mold (you’d think the borax would prevent that,
but the borax might have been leached out of the surface layer by the
boiling).

This slimy water-soluble stuff makes me wonder if maybe with so much
starch the stuff might not be waterproof even at room temperature.  It
might be worth trying a wider range of ratios and fillers.

A permanent marker (Du Hu brand, UPC 9-930691-011013) easily marks the
Oogoo (tried on the two sand-free samples from last night and the one
from the other day), but it easily rubs off.  A smiley face thus drawn
on one of the Oogoo balls rubbed onto paper transfers onto the paper,
suggesting the possibility of flexographic offset printing with this
material.

By 02:41 the sand-filled Oogoo had stopped feeling wet on the top side
(and stopped depositing water-soluble slime on wine bottles when
rubbed) but still felt wet on the bottom (and still deposited slime).

02021-08-16
-----------

The 39 grams of sand-filled Oogoo had dried out by this afternoon.  I
pounded the crap out of it with a hammer against some bricks (maybe 20
hammer blows of 50 J each); it crumbled somewhat and became softer and
porous, but mostly retained its structural integrity.  The only pieces
that came off were due to a couple of hammer blows where the corner of
the hammer punched all the way through it into the brick on the other
side.  The surfaces are now whiter and rougher.  It now weighs 38.0 g,
and I regret not having weighed it before pounding it with the hammer,
because I suspect that most of that weight loss was from boiling
starch out of its surface, not from hammering damage.

This seems like noticeably worse impact toughness than I would
normally expect from this kind of silicone, but then again, this
object is only 16% silicone by weight.  It’s kind of in the ballpark
for what I’d expect from non-ferrous metals, although of course this
impact toughness was achieved mostly through large deformations rather
than large stiffness.

As I suspected yesterday, I can cut through the stuff with a razor
knife just by pushing it hard enough through the material if I
carefully avoid sawing back and forth, which immediately destroys the
edge of the razor knife.  By contrast, the knife edge is mostly intact
when I just push through, though not without nicks from the sand.
Pushing hard even works when the knife edge has been thus dulled by
sawing, although it requires more force.

Using the unsharpened *back* of the razor knife, I can cut through the
pumice quite readily — not quite as readily as cutting soft materials
like cardboard or silicone, but very nearly.  This further reinforces
my impression that Foams Are A Miracle.

02021-08-19
-----------

The Oogoo samples from 02021-08-15 are of course fully hardened
through, and can easily be cut with a razor knife.  Perhaps more
interestingly, with some sawing, they can be cut with a tin can lid as
well, which takes more effort and leaves a scalloped cut.  An
acetic-acid smell is evident upon cutting, but it is not chokingly
strong.

I got a new, hopefully less melty blowtorch head, made of brass
(US$14), for those 8-ounce (227-g) butane bottles.

I also got some 5-mm carbon arc cutting electrodes (11.2 g,
5.11–5.19 mm diameter at the short unclad tip, 5.20–5.32 mm diameter
in the copper-clad section, 306 mm length, thus average density around
1.69 g/cc).  Treated as pencil leads, they leave only very light marks
on paper (about 4H or 6H pencil lead hardness, say.).  With
significant difficulty I can break the end off the carbon rod with my
fingers, revealing an earthy fracture, dull black with a few tiny
bright particles, probably cleaved graphite grains.  The sparkly
carbon cladding resists water, ethanol, and nail polish diluent
(probably ethyl acetate) with no damage; when heated, it forms
iridescent coatings and then dull black copper oxide; and my
multimeter can measure no resistance (though it bottoms out at about
½Ω), so it may be just copper plating rather than any kind of paint.
The ohmmeter measures the graphite itself as highly conductive, but
with significant contact resistance of a few hundred milliohms.
Measuring the resistivity of the carbon rod itself would require
removing the copper from it.

I heated one of the electrodes to orange heat with the brass torch.
Mina used the hot end to burn holes in a cardboard box, which
curiously smoldered and went out rather than igniting.

I flamed one of the waterglass/starch/borax samples from before, and
it intumesced lightly as before.

I took one of the old waterglass-foam samples and melted it a bit with
the new brass torch, which was relatively easy.  Then I poured a bit
of oil of lime (it keeps accumulating in the Monster can) onto the
sample and tried again; the oil of lime seems to have been effective
at increasing the heat resistance of the foam by, presumably,
converting it to amorphous calcium silicate; now it apparently suffers
no degradation even at white heat.  Since muriate of lime melts at
772–5° the white-hot solid residuum cannot be merely muriate of lime.

The process filled the kitchen with a cockroach-like aroma, which, as
Mina pointed out, is almost surely smoke from the bamboo chopsticks I
was using to hold the waterglass foam sample in front of the flame.

I tried washing the sample with water after heating to remove the
salt, which seems to have caused it to crumble without removing all
the salt, because it still left a sticky residue on my hands after
washing (more like oil of lime than plain salt) and created a white
efflorescence on subsequent heating.  This is probably a problem that
could be solved by sufficient heating time and washing time.

This suggests the following process for making a tiny waterglass foam
oven:

- Pour the appropriate amount of waterglass onto a flat sheet of
  polyethylene and let it dry to a thin layer of glass.
- Build the overall structure out of some moderately heat-resistant
  material: beer cans, aluminum foil, calcined alabaster paste, mud,
  that kind of thing.
- Paint the thin layer of glass with an even thinner layer of
  waterglass to make it sticky, then break it into small pieces.
- Stick the small pieces of waterglass onto the inside of the oven
  structure, several layers thick, to form the intumescent refractory
  layer.
- Blow enough flame or hot air through the inside to foam up the
  waterglass.
- Pour or spray oil of lime onto the inside to provide lime to the
  foam.
- Blow enough flame or hot air through the inside to thoroughly dry
  out and possibly melt the muriate of lime, and possibly drive off
  some marine acid air.
- Possibly, after it cools, wash the foam with water to remove the
  potentially corrosive salt.
- Add a hardfacing layer on the inside of the foam, maybe paper coated
  with waterglass and silica sand or aluminum hydroxide, or waterglass
  mixed with starch and charred, to form a solid layer that can
  support solid objects without damaging the surface of the foam.

You could also paint the waterglass directly onto the structure, but
you might probably need to paint several coats, waiting for each one
to dry in between, to get enough thickness.  It would be pretty cool
if you could include the oil of lime between the layers of waterglass
instead of applying it afterwards, so that’s probably worth a try to
see if I can get reasonably low densities that way.

It’s likely that such a low-density foam will have a more open-cell
structure and thus more convection through it than the denser
closed-cell foams that firebrick normally consists of, and therefore a
lower thermal insulance.  Even then, though, it might have better
insulance *per mass*, so it might still be useful for portable pocket
ovens.

The pieces of waterglass/starch dough from 02021-08-13 have thoroughly
hardened.  I flamed one of them with the brass blowtorch for a few
minutes, and it intumesced, swelling by perhaps a factor of 2, forming
a black foam which mostly did not melt, maybe just a little bit around
the edges.  Both the uncharred material and the charred material take
noticeable effort to break by hand; the charred material is a fine
foam with mostly bubbles around the size of 100 μm which can be
indented with the thumbnail with some effort, while the uncharred
material does not appear to be a foam and cannot be thus indented.  It
did smolder for a few seconds after the flame was removed, producing
the pine-pitch-like smell I mentioned previously.

I had previously mixed up calcined alabaster powder with a retail
baking powder (double-acting I think, and including bicarbonate, but I
don’t know what else) and baked it in the oven into a white biscuit.
It had formed an open-cell foam with about 50% porosity and pore sizes
on the order of 2 mm.  I took half of this and heated part of it with
the brass torch to white heat for 7 minutes.  This formed a black
circle, with a dark gray circle inside of it, with a 20-mm-radius
white circle inside of that, with increasing cracking visible in the
gray and white parts.  Upon removal of heat, it continued to glow
visibly through the cracks for a minute or so.  The white part flaked
away somewhat under finger pressure; on breaking the biscuit, it
seemed to have penetrated some 5mm deep.  Unexpectedly, most of the
biscuit thickness had turned gray, and it fell apart in my hand.

On repeating the process, I noted a slight acid smell, and my lungs
became irritated, perhaps due to failing to maintain a judicious
distance from the proceedings and producing a bit of vitriol from the
alabaster.

I used the torch on the Monster can I’d previously (02021-07-30) lined
with borax/flour/starch/water intumescent refractory to heat up some
eggshells to a yellow or white heat for a couple of minutes.
Unfortunately, the refractory material began to smolder, and the paint
on the outside of the can started to change color, indicating that it
was burning, so I aborted.  There was also a distinct smell of
ammonia, so perhaps the can was sitting on top of some undecomposed
diammonium phosphate from a previous test.  (Also, a smell of burning
plastic from the can.)  The lining had broken apart into many pieces,
exposing much of the walls, and it continued to smolder for several
minutes, even after I dumped it out of the can, so, again, the borax
was not as effective at preventing combustion as one might hope.

I picked the eggshells out of the smoldering rubble with chopsticks
(some of them had stuck slightly to the carbon foam) and dropped them
into a plastic yogurt cup, then dripped a few drops of water into it.
There was no visible reaction or evident heating, but after a few
minutes the water looked milky.  This seemed promising.  The milkiness
was due to tiny white particles.  However, several drops of this milky
liquid were unable to neutralize a couple of drops of vinegar to the
point where baking soda wouldn’t fizz, so the milkiness probably
wasn’t slaked lime as I was hoping it was.

Properly calcining lime probably requires longer heating, maybe 15
minutes to 15 hours.  15 days is more traditional, but I think I can
do better than that.

I had the remaining fragments of waterglass foam floating in water for
a few hours.  They did not crumble any further, so whatever caused
them to crumble earlier, it probably wasn’t the water — either it was
my fingers’ roughness, or the process of boiling water *out* of them,
or maybe there were parts subject to water attack and parts that
weren’t.

I placed them on a bed of vermiculite and heated them with the brass
torch to white heat.  Once white heat was reached, they slowly melted,
but they retained substantial foam structure for several minutes of
such heating.  (As before, untreated waterglass foam disintegrates
upon being heated to merely orange heat in well under a minute,
collapsing down to a glob of glass.)  I don’t know if this is because
the calcium treatment was incomplete or because lime silica glass
can’t withstand the temperatures involved.  The vermiculite remained
unaffected, so the temperature wasn’t exceeding its melting point.

Some acid gas was evolved from the vermiculite, so I think it may be
contaminated from a previous test.

02021-08-20
-----------

Mixed up some new Oogoo, this time with coloring.  In a 126.5-gram
glass jar Mina mixed 11.9 grams of dish detergent (see below) with a
tiny amount of food coloring paste (see below).  This produced a
brilliant dark violet color.  On weighing it afterwards, the scale
read 137.9 g, which is 0.5 g less than before adding the coloring (so
there’s only 11.4 g of detergent/coloring mix); I think there are
about 0.5 grams of detergent mix left on the Q-tips.

For the Oogoo, I mixed 27.6 g of the same 3M 420 silicone as before
with 27.6 g of cassava starch inside a tiny plastic shopping bag by
kneading it through the bag.  I think a Ziploc bag would be a much
better approach; the thin (10-μm?) bag developed a hole in it during
the kneading process.  After it was thoroughly kneaded, we waited 9
minutes, then kneaded the resulting deposits into a 43.5-gram ball of
Oogoo.  To this we added 2.9 grams of the detergent/coloring mix,
which I kneaded thoroughly together, getting a uniform light lilac
color.

The dish-detergent-added Oogoo (≈6% commercial detergent mix, maybe
≈1% sodium lauryl sulfate and sodium laureth sulfate, but we don’t
really know) was noticeably softer during molding and seemed
noticeably less prone to stick to our hands, but also seemed to be
less cohesive during kneading.  (I now realize I should have kept some
aside without detergent to compare post-cure properties.)  I’m
astonished that it was able to mix with the silicone at all; Mina told
me it would work but I didn’t really believe her.  I thought the water
either wouldn’t mix in or would immediately polymerize all the
silicone.  (Surely the silicone polymerization does consume some of
the water from the detergent.)

Unfortunately I neglected to weigh the ball after mixing the detergent
into it, which would have been a useful clue as to how much of the
detergent and coloring went into the Oogoo and how much soaked into my
hands instead.

Mina shaped most of the ball into an eight-petaled flower, then
painted part of the outside with food coloring/detergent mix left over
on the Q-tips.  I shaped a small mushroom from it.

I also neglected to measure how long it took to harden the silicone,
but it did seem to be quicker than on other occasions.

Dish detergent: “5× concentrated”, lemon scent, Magistral UPC
7-500435-137900; biodegradable active surfactants *alquilsulfato de
sodio, alquiletoxisulfato de sodio y óxido de amina*; other
ingredients: *etanol, agua, coadyuvantes, agente de limpieza,
conservantes, colorante y fragancia*, which is roughly as nonspecific
as you could possibly get.  “*Materia activa minima 20%*” might mean
it’s 20% surfactants, or it might not.

Food coloring paste: Fleibor.com.ar; *Azul T: azul brillante al
3.17%*, bottled April 25, 02016, ingredients: *azul indigotina, azul
patente, tartrazina, propilen glicol, glicerina, azúcar, dióxido de
silicio*, which is a pretty intense cyan, and also *Violeta L: azul
indigotina y amaranto al 14.51%*, bottled January 4, 02016,
ingredients: *entrocina, amaranto, azul indigotina, azul patente,
propilen glicol, glicerina, azúcar, dióxido de silicio*, which is a
pretty intense magenta.

It is now 16:58.

At 17:20, the color/detergent mix painted onto the outside of the
flower is still wet, but the Oogoo is quite firmly set.

At 17:26 I lined a dry steel bowl with aluminum foil (the 10μm stuff I
might have mentioned previously, maybe Ecobol shitty store brand;
folded in half 5 times to make 32 layers, I measure 0.32 mm with the
calipers) and poured waterglass into it, then covered the top with
aluminum foil and put it on low heat, the intent being to make some
more waterglass foam, but this time with an aluminum foil backing on
one side.  At 17:31 and 17:37 and 17:45 it’s crackling in a
threatening fashion.  At 17:51 it has died down quite a bit.  At 18:05
it seems to have stopped completely, and the top aluminum foil is
distended upwards; I can feel a hot, hard round shape through it,
which is presumably waterglass foam, suggesting that this approach to
foaming waterglass has actually been enormously more successful than I
had imagined it could be.  I might have had 2 mm of waterglass in the
bottom of the bowl and now it’s apparently like 70 mm tall!  That
suggests a considerably larger void fraction than I’ve been able to
achieve in the past.

I turned it off at 18:56 after cooking on low heat for an hour and a
half, at which point it was maybe making some tiny little crackles you
could barely hear if you put your ear next to it.  I’m eager to see
what the foam structure looks like, but I want to let it cool slowly
to reduce cracking from thermal deltas (I can hear slight crackling,
which is probably precisely that).  The whole bowl, foil, foam, and
all, weighs 57.6 g, but I’m not sure if this is the same bowl I
previously weighed empty at 42.3 g or a different one.  It’s about
170 mm in diameter.  If the loaf’s volume is ⅓ of the cylinder it fits
inside, ø170 mm × 70 mm, that would be 530 mℓ.  If it really weighs
15.3 g and occupies 530 mℓ, that’s 29 mg/cc, *half* the density of the
foams I made previously.  I wonder if it’s just one giant bubble,
though.

At 19:24 it seems to be silent and the hard shape distending the top
of the foil is cool to the touch.

At 19:27 there is only the occasional click from it.  I removed it
from the bowl.  It weighed 15.5 g.  I had hoped it was filling the
whole interior of the bowl, but that’s not what happened at all; it’s
probably only about the same density as the previous samples.  Because
the heat was being applied from below, the bottom part of the
waterglass, stuck to the lower foil, hardened first.  Then, as the
rest of it gradually hardened, the upper part expanded, causing the
waterglass layer to curl and form a large empty space below it, some
30 mm deep and 70 mm across.  The overall mass of waterglass froth,
which looks very much like soap-bubble froth from well-shampooed hair,
is some 90 mm across.

With some care I was able to peel almost all of the upper aluminum off
of it, tearing off aluminum tags in only three places (removed
successfully with the fingers), and leaving invisible fragments of
waterglass on the aluminum in a few more places that can be felt with
the fingers.  The outer soap-bubble-like film is very fragile, and on
a couple of cases as I weighed it and opened the package, I have seen
bubbles of glass floating around in the air.  A small puff of air from
my lips can shatter some of the foam into glistening fragments.

<https://ibb.co/4WrfjQs>

On the tongue the delicate bubble surfaces feel a bit like gelatin
bubbles, but have no taste, leaving a slight slipperiness and tingling
for a few minutes like some soaps.  (At this point it’s worth
mentioning that this is not a very alkaline waterglass formulation; it
has a lot of silicon per sodium.)  When touching the denser parts of
the froth with my tongue, they do not immediately dissolve, but remain
solid, as you would expect for sodium silicates.  However, nothing
gritty comes off in the mouth.

The aluminum foil I peeled off the top weighs 1.7 g, and the remaining
waterglass foam and bottom foil together weigh 13.8 g.  Since the top
and bottom foil are about the same size this suggests that the foam
alone weighs about 12.1 g.

Concerned that the tiny glass flakes from the bubbles might cause skin
irritation, I rubbed the froth lightly on my slighly sweat-damp left
thigh to deposit a bunch of shiny bubble tops, then rubbed it around
thoroughly until the deposit was just a fine glitter, so that if the
microscopic sharp glass edges causes irritation mechanically (like
fiberglass) I will be able to observe it there.  Either I will get a
hell of a rash on my thigh or I can tell people I’m Edward Cullen.

Kinesthetically the foam feels like it’s about 25 or 30 mm thick in
the middle, maybe 15 mm thick near the edge.  This permits a crude
volume estimate as a 120-mm-diameter circle (due to the edge curling)
that’s 20 mm thick, which would be 230 mℓ.  13.8 g in 230 mℓ would be
61 mg/cc, which is about the same density I’ve gotten in the past.
This might be slightly less dense because of the bottom foil.

(Later measurements, after cutting, show that it was about 20 mm thick
in the middle and about 10 mm thick near the edge, occasionally as
much as 15, but 120 mm is about right.)

I heated one side of the waterglass mass with the brass torch and, as
before, the surface immediately melted at orange heat, accompanied by
a great deal of crackling and a few flakes flying away in the air,
then settling nearby.  After 20 seconds of heating with the torch, it
looked like styrofoam whose surface has been eaten by gasoline or
acetone.  I poured some saturated oil of lime over another part of it,
waited about 20 seconds, heated it gently with the torch at a distance
for about 30 seconds to drive off the water, and then heated the
lime-treated surface strongly for about 20 seconds.  The treated
surface melted only very slightly at yellow-white heat.  This left a
white efflorescence.  Touching it with my fingers leaves the sticky
oil-of-lime feeling on them, so I suspect that only some of the oil of
lime was consumed.

I tried to film this with my cellphone but can’t figure out how to get
the exposure right in video, so the blowtorch-affected area is just
white.  The video has some other problems, like being 310 MB.  I was
able to take some stills, especially after I learned about the
voice-activation feature of the cellphone.

<https://ibb.co/PgCdb4p>

There was some of the “cockroach” smell from heating the lime-treated
part of the waterglass, even though no chopsticks were present, and
maybe also some acid gas.  This suggests that I might be smelling some
kind of muriate or calcium product, or possibly something that’s
present as an impurity in my industrial-desiccant source.

After all this it weighs 16.4 g, which suggests that the oil of lime
added about 2.6 g, including the part that’s still wet on the
still-attached aluminum foil.  Removing as much as possible of the
aluminum foil reduces the weight to 14.2 g.  In the process I noticed
that the bottom aluminum foil had actually torn in a few places,
looking rather like stretch marks from rapid weight gain.  Also, it’s
not very firmly adherent; it’s possible to peel it off in bits in
places.  The waterglass attached to the aluminum foil is noticeably
porous, though much less than the surface; I can push my thumbnail
through the foil into the waterglass.

At 20:52 my thigh is still glittery and not irritated.  It’s been
maybe half an hour since I applied the potential irritant, but if I
recall correctly from my childhood, skin irritation from fiberglass
can take hours to develop.  At 21:22 still no irritation.

I passed some water from the faucet over one side of it to see if it
would have a similar effect to the fire, but it seems to have only
affected a few of the largest and most delicate bubbles.

I cut it in half with a razor knife, mostly using the back of the
blade.  For this it was convenient to hold the foam between my thumb
on the aluminum-foil backing and a finger on the untreated
blowtorch-melted area, which is partly covered by a network of dense
glass which can withstand finger pressure without crumbling.  Cutting
through the area that had been treated with oil of lime and then
melted was much more difficult.  I dropped half of it on the floor
from a standing position when I finished; a small piece broke off from
the impact.

<https://ibb.co/sFVgsXk>

With my teeth, I took a tiny bite of one of the areas affected by the
water, about 21:34.  The material is gritty between my teeth, like
toothpaste, rather than dissolving immediately upon being reduced to
fine powder.  No large sand-like grains are present.  It’s still
gritty at 21:36.  Only a little grittiness is left at 21:44 but
probably because I swallowed the grit rather than because it
dissolved.

If this foam is 15 mm thick, 120 mm in diameter, and weighed 12.1 g
(the guess above), it’s 71 mg/cc, which is a little *denser* than some
I’d made in the past (for example by rapid heating).  According to
file `refractories.md`, liquid waterglass costs US$2/kg, which
probably means the solid form costs about US$6/kg (I missed an
opportunity to find this out today by not weighing the bowl before
cooking the foam).  At 71 mg/cc that would be US$430/m³ or 42.6¢/ℓ,
which is slightly more expensive per volume as other lightweight
insulating mineral aggregates mentioned in that file such as pumice
(17¢/ℓ), LECA (29¢/ℓ or 12¢/ℓ for construction), rock wool (31¢/ℓ),
perlite (38¢/ℓ), and vermiculite (23¢/ℓ), though these are mostly
denser: pumice is 400 mg/cc, LECA is 1200 mg/cc, rock wool is
100 mg/cc, perlite is 128 mg/cc, and vermiculite is 60–160 mg/cc.
Plausibly, this waterglass foam could provide better insulation than
these other materials, being lighter in weight than most of them, and
being a solid mostly closed-cell foam rather than an open-cell foam or
a loose particulate aggregate.

This experience suggests a few ways of making sandwich panels out of
waterglass foam:

- Sandwiching the liquid between two sheets of aluminum foil and
  heating it, maybe under some pressure.  Preferably you’d use thicker
  aluminum foil/flashing, like 60 μm, rather than this 10 μm
  bargain-basement stuff.  According to the guess above, the foam’s
  *areal* density is about 110 mg/cm².  This aluminum foil at 10 μm
  and 2.70 g/cc is only 2.7 mg/cm²; one layer on each side would be
  5.4 mg/cm², which is only 5% of the total weight.  According to file
  `sandwich-panel-optimization.md`, sandwich panels of a given areal
  density are stiffest when their faces are ⅓ of their total mass.
  (You’d probably need to perforate the foil to allow the water vapor
  to escape.)
- By heating the surface of the foam, you can melt it into a hard
  white glass layer, which is very stiff, which is what you want for
  sandwich panels.

Part of my intent with this sample was originally to carve it into
some kind of interesting shape and then melt the shape’s surface to
make it sturdy (and maybe also cover it in aluminum foil), but I got
caught up in other stuff I guess.

I cut out a small cuboid to measure density.  It floats in water
without getting waterlogged or sinking, which (in combination with its
aggressively hydrophilic nature) suggests that most of the structure
is closed-cell foam, which is good news for use as insulation.  The
outermost part does seem to absorb water; perhaps its cells were open
when it formed, or perhaps they were originally closed but broke
easily.  After observing this, I realized I was an idiot, because I
hadn’t weighed the cube dry, so I rinsed the cube and converted the
bowl into a dehydration chamber: I stuck the cube in the bowl on top
of a plastic lid on top of some anhydrous muriate of lime.  The idea
is that if I dry it by just heating it up, I’d possibly damage its
foam structure.

It’s 02:06 and still no detectable skin irritation.

I tried draping some aluminum foil over the top of one of the cut
pieces of the waterglass foam and melting it on with the brass torch,
but this didn’t work very well; the foam under the melted aluminum
foil had a tendency to rip it apart, and aluminum foil after having
been melted tends to break easily, and it looks dull and wrinkly.  By
contrast, the original underside foil remained fairly shiny.  I think
a better way to put an aluminum-foil surface on a shape carved from
this foam might be to coat one side of the foil with *liquid*
waterglass, then wrap it around the foam, then cook it.

This process also evolved some acid gas, I think from the vermiculite
bed I was resting the foam on for this process.

02021-08-21
-----------

The cuboid, probably mostly dehydrated, weighs 900 mg.  I really should
get a 10-mg-resolution scale!  Or I should have cut out a much larger
cuboid.

I made Mina coffee and myself mate with the brass torch.

I wonder if I could get waterglass to gel with some agar?  Agar is
supposed to [gel at pH from 2.5–10][4] and concentrations in the
0.5%-1% range.  Then maybe I could make some aluminum-foil waterglass
tape with the waterglass gelled with agar, then wrap it to form a
thing, then let it dry or treat it with polyvalent cations or with CO₂
before heating.  I don’t think I have any agar, though.

[4]: https://stellaculinary.com/cooking-videos/food-science-101/fs-004-guide-agar-gels

With great difficulty, I bit through one of the Oogoo samples from
02021-08-15 — the borax one, I suspect, from the taste and the soapy
tongue feel afterwards.  A slight acetic-acid smell is still evident.
After being rinsed, it’s relatively straightforward to tear the piece
the rest of the way, which is also true with an unrinsed piece that I
cut partway through with a razor knife.  However, the tearing process
is only easy if done very slowly; the fibers of PDMS bridging the
growing crack gradually yield, neck, and break.

I folded a bag from aluminum foil (maybe 20 mm × 150 mm) and poured a
few grams of waterglass into it.  On heating it with the brass torch
on a bed of vermiculite, it swelled and crackled, and the waterglass
inside foamed up and eventually hardened, and then the aluminum on top
melted off.  I added another torch, double-fisting the butane.
Eventually it seemed to become inactive, so I turned the torches off
and turned it over (the bottom was still shiny foil), then heated it
some more.  Upon turning it a second time the vermiculite stuck to it
in a syrupy mass, probably because the waterglass had poured out
through the melted-open holes in the aluminum into the vermiculite.
Heating the waterglass-cemented vermiculite cemented it together.  As
usual, the foam melted and collapsed rapidly whenever the torches
brought it to an orange heat.

(It occurred to me that the vermiculite might be cemented with moist
phosphoric acid from some previous tests, and there was indeed some
acid-gas smell present, but I haven’t actually seen any syrupy
phosphoric acid going around.  I got some of the syrupy vermiculite
stuff on my fingers and didn’t wash it off for several minutes, but
have no burns, so it was probably waterglass.)

I was hoping that I could get a chunk of waterglass foam entirely
covered with aluminum foil this way, but I think for that to work, I
will need to heat it more gently — maybe quickly, as with hot sand,
but to a temperature below the melting point of the aluminum.

I never did get any detectable skin irritation from rubbing my thigh
with waterglass micro-bubble fragments last night.

The food coloring painted with detergent onto the flower Mina made
yesterday is still wet, presumably due to the detergent.  The mushroom
I made is still much, much softer, especially at large deformations,
than the other Oogoo I’ve made in the past without color or dish
detergent, and so is the flower.  Upon inflicting large deformations
on them with my fingernail, I observe some white discoloration, which
is probably permanent.  I suspect that the dish detergent is acting as
a sort of plasticizer.  The feeling is sort of in the neighborhood of
stretchy human skin, an illusion that becomes more pronounced when I
rub the mushroom with cassava starch (inspired by vague memories that
the “Cyberskin” skin simulant is a silicone with talcum powder added.)

02021-08-22
-----------

I broke apart one of the chunks of cemented vermiculite by hand,
finding white foam between the vermiculite grains, which I think
confirms that it was leaked waterglass and not contaminating
phosphoric acid.  This is more evident when I cut it with a razor
knife instead of breaking it by hand, because breakage by hand tends
to cleave it along cleavage lines within the weak vermiculite grains.

Bought more dish detergent, the Unilever Cif version, also 20%
surfactants, except they tell you what they are.  AR$175 (US$1) for
500 mℓ, which works out to about US$10/kg for the sodium laureth
sulfate etc., which seems a bit pricey to me.

02021-08-23
-----------

I checked MercadoLibre again today.  Grupo Ecoquimica has raised all
their prices by about 25–50%, presumably to compensate for recent
inflation; for example, alum is AR$850/kg (US$4.70/kg) instead of
AR$630/kg, and bentonite is AR$75/kg (42¢/kg) instead of AR$50/kg.
It’s about 4 km away.  I was planning to go, but didn’t.

The PVA glue I crosslinked with borax on 02021-07-28 has quite
thoroughly dried out.  I cut the chunk in half with a hacksaw, which
took a couple of minutes (it’s about 20mm in diameter) and felt a lot
like cutting a solid hard plastic, with no melting on the saw blade, a
thermoset.  It’s hard all the way through, and it smells slightly of
PVA inside.  This made me wonder whether it was in fact a thermoset.

Shibayama, Yoshizawa, Kurokawa, Fujiwara, and Nomura published a paper
in 01988 which suggests that this slime definitely can gel, and higher
pH raises the gel’s melting temperature, though they mostly measured
gels that melted around 75° with 0.8–2.5 × 10⁻² mol/ℓ of boric
acid. However, they propose that the borate is only covalently bonded
to one of the PVA chains, while the other chelates a sodium ion,
rather than forming a di-diol cross-linking bond, and neither that
mechanism nor their melting point plots are particularly promising for
the prospects of this material being a thermoset.

I heated a small piece of it on vermiculite with the brass torch.  Its
surface intumesced slightly with white bubbles at gentle heating, and
it produced a terrible smell reminiscent of burning polystyrene, and a
little bit of white smoke.  Stronger heating charred the surface and
produced a little flame, which self-extinguished in a second or two
and did not continue smoldering.  The uncharred material had stuck to
the vermiculite and become noticeably plastic; I could pull it apart
with my fingers.  I conclude that it is not a thermoset, just another
thermoplastic (if a particularly hard one, and one that forms a nice
gel with water).

Even if it’s a thermoplastic, though, you could still use a PVA
solution as a binder for 3-D printing in a powder bed of filler doped
with some kind of borate.

A low-concentration thermoset hydrogel would be appealing for the
waterglass-tape application mentioned earlier, a great improvement on
agar, as well as for molding things with the appropriate fillers and
for preceramic polymers and for producing carbon foam (or fibers).
All I have available at the moment is wheat gluten; the internet
suggests chitosan cross-linked with β-glycerophosphate, dicarboxylic
acids such as citrate, glutaraldehyde, divinyl sulfone,
epichlorohydrin, or electron beams as possibilities, or [cellulose or
chitin][5] dissolved in more exotic solvents, which I guess is how
rayon/cellophane is made.  It seems likely that most materials that
could covalently cross-link common biopolymers like starch or chitosan
would be pretty toxic; apparently epichlorohydrin, monosodium
phosphate, sodium trimetaphosphate, and sodium tripolyphosphate
(sodium triphosphate) are commonly used for cross-linking starches.
(Could the obesity pandemic be largely caused by modified food
starch?)

[5]: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2016/gc/c5gc02396c "Hydrogels based on cellulose and chitin: fabrication, properties, and applications, by Shen, Shamshina, Berton, Gurau, and Rogers, 10.1039/C5GC02396C Green Chem., 02016, 18, 53-75, CC-BY"

02021-08-24
-----------

I heated a bit of baling wire in the brass torch to orange heat to
melt some holes in the five bottom lobes of a plastic soft-drink
bottle (Tomasso cola) to turn it into a gardening pot, which yielded
curls of white smoke with a burning-plastic smell, but no flames.  I
burned the remaining PET off the wire with the torch, then set it down
to cool on a piece of the waterglass foam, to which it did not
noticeably adhere.  Although it’s only 57 mm long and about 1.5 mm
diameter, the handle end didn’t get hot throughout the whole process.
This is the same wire I had Mina use to burn the mole off my forearm,
but she had it gripped in the vise-grips rather than her hand.

I notice that the off-balance weight of the brass torch is making the
butane can a little unstable now that it’s nearly empty.

It occurs to me that maybe some metal hydroxide could serve as the
hydroxyl donor for the polymerization of acetic-cure silicone, and
copper hydroxide (which I’ve made previously by electrolysis) seems
like an ideal candidate because of its laid-back enthalpy of formation
(-225 kJ/mol OH) and associated low decomposition temperature.  By
contrast, sodium hydroxide is -425.8 kJ/mol and doesn’t boil
(decomposing into the elements, I think) until 1388°, and aluminum
trihydroxide (78.00 g/mol, 2.42 g/cc, gibbsite, dehydrates in the
range 180°–300°) is -1277 kJ/mol, or -426 kJ/mol OH, same as the
sodium salt.

Hmm, <https://iupac.github.io/SolubilityDataSeries/> is an intriguing
URL!  Apparently IUPAC has put their solubility data series on GitHub,
as well as a number of other datasets, although the link to the source
repository seems to be broken.  [Copper hydroxides are in volume
23][7].  About half of the volumes have analogous URLs; many others
(5, 6, 16, 17, 27, 28, 45, 46, 53, and 67–104) are missing.

[7]: https://iupac.github.io/SolubilityDataSeries/volumes/SDS-23.pdf

IUPAC’s solubility data is from 01986 and suggests using lye or
ammonia to solubilize copper hydroxide.  It has this lovely epigraph
at the beginning of the Foreword:

> If the knowledge is undigested or simply wrong, more is not better[.]

This seems to be a jab at the CRC Handbook:

> On the other hand, tertiary sources — handbooks, reference books and
> other tabulated and graphical compilations — as they exist today are
> comprehensive but, as a rule, uncritical.  They usually attempt to
> cover whole disciplines, and thus obviously are superficial in
> treatment.  Since they command a wide market, we believe that their
> service to the advancement of science is at least questionable.

02021-08-25
-----------

I bought a kg of electrical copper from the recycler around the corner
for AR$1200 (US$6.70/kg).  Some of it is very fine (presumably
enameled wire from CRT yokes) while other parts are stranded, thicker,
and uninsulated, measuring 0Ω on the multimeter.  I cut a 1-meter
section of a single strand of the uninsulated cable, which measures
0.51–0.57 mm in diameter with the calipers at different places along
the strand, thus having a volume of about 0.20–0.26 cc.  It weighs
2.1 g, which would put it in the density range 8.2–10.3 g/cc.  It can
be easily bent by hand.

It melts on the bed of vermiculite at a red-orange heat from the
butane torches, a heat which is difficult to attain without placing
some heat-reflecting waterglass foam behind the wire, at which point
the waterglass also starts melting.  Upon heating, it forms a hard,
adherent black oxide coating.  The melting is sharply defined, so that
an intact wire forms a small sphere of liquid at the end of it.  No
visible fumes are emitted.

All of these characteristics are consistent with the metal really
being copper.  The density is in the right range; measuring the
density of a larger piece of metal, or using a less shitty scale,
would give me a more precise number.  Zinc (from brass) would boil at
907°, emitting white fumes, and [bronze would partly melt around
798°][10], or, in some flavors, completely melt at below 750°.  Either
alloy would melt gradually rather than suddenly, and both would
probably be harder.

[10]: https://www.tf.uni-kiel.de/matwis/amat/iss/kap_6/illustr/i6_2_1.html

The melted copper wetted the vermiculite grains enough to stick firmly
to them, suggesting that it ought to be possible to use copper (in a
reducing atmosphere!) to repair broken pottery in the same way as
silver and gold.  To confirm this, I tried melting a little more
copper wire on a bed of sand, and indeed the little ball of melted
copper got sand stuck all over it, much of which I could not remove
with my thumbnail.  The effort abraded away much of my thumbnail
stickout, in fact.  I attempted to test the hypothesis directly by
putting a couple of broken bits of ceramic floor tile with copper wire
between them into an oven improvised from bits of waterglass foam, but
although the glaze on one of the tile bits melted and flowed a bit, I
wasn’t able to get them hot enough with the torches to melt the
copper.  They glowed orange.  I *was* able to melt copper wire onto
the bottom of one of the tiles by itself, a little, but it was
relatively easy to dislodge after it cooled.

In the process I lost the aluminum foil on the bottom side of one of
the waterglass pieces from the loaf I baked the other day; it melted
away, along with a good portion of the thickness of the waterglass.
Some of the waterglass also melted onto the top of one of the ceramic
tile fragments, though I was able to dislodge it later.

The flames shooting out of the gaps in the oven were bright green,
which might be from something in the ceramic (especially its glaze) or
(less likely) the copper or waterglass.

During this process there were some acid fumes and some that smelled a
bit like some kind of burning plastic, so I probably ought to throw
out this vermiculite bed.  Now I have both slightly irritated lungs
and throat and a bit of a headache.

It occurs to me that if I can disperse a fine dust of a
water-insoluble inert source of polyvalent cations in the waterglass,
something that remains fairly inert at the low temperatures needed to
soften and foam up the waterglass but then gives up its ions when the
waterglass is facing real fire, it would probably work better than
just applying oil of lime to the surface of the foam.  Candidates
include talc, aluminum trihydroxide, bentonite, copper oxides or
hydroxide, finely ground enstatite, dehydrated borax, chalk, kaolin,
rutile, or zincite.  Amorphous silica such as diatomaceous earth might
also work, but in a different way, by dissolving into the warm
anhydrous sodium silicate melt and merely diluting the sodium rather
than displacing it.

It occurred to me that an acid electrolyte like vinegar is not going
to be useful for producing copper hydroxide, because it will convert
essentially all the copper hydroxide into (soluble) copper acetate.
So I resolved to get a vitriol electrolyte, but what I have handy is
green vitriol, which might produce undesirable deposits of its own,
maybe insoluble iron hydroxide, contaminating the copper hydroxide.

So I heated up some baking soda in tap water on the stove; it started
bubbling as soon as I started applying heat, indicating that it was
decomposing to soda ash.  I added a little unheated baking soda to a
near-transparent green solution of iron sulfate fertilizer in tap
water, resulting in the formation of the usual nasty green muck with
lots of bubbles.  After the baking soda had boiled for a while,
spoonfuls of the solution still bubbled enthusiastically when vinegar
was dripped into the spoon.  But I added the hot solution to the iron
etc. mix and got only a little more bubbling, presumably due to the
accelerated decomposition of the remaining baking soda.  Bubbling
slowed and the solution began to defecate after a few minutes.

Now I realize that because I didn’t measure anything my solution
contains an unknown mix of soda and sal mirabilis, plus the nasty
green iron carbonate that’s precipitating out.  If I use that to
electrolyze the copper I’ll end up with verditer, which is the usual
blue-green pigment and which decomposes to tenorite on heating, so I
should be satisfied with that.  But in that case I might as well just
use the soda as the electrolyte directly without the sal mirabilis.

I turned off the flame for a while, allowing the soda to cool a bit
and crystallize into a single large mass which broke up and partly
dissolved readily upon the addition of more water.  Reheating produced
no further bubbles, indicating that the baking soda was essentially
all decomposed.  There was a small black speck floating in it,
probably from the defective faucet.  I spooned a bit of the menstruum
into the defecated vitriol product, which precipitated no further
visible solids, indicating an excess of soda.  Then I decided to
dehydrate the soda, for which purpose I added aluminum foil over the
top of the container.  After a few minutes of further heating, pops
were heard, so I lowered the flame further.  Pops continued; upon
inspection the soda has crystallized into a mostly porous mass, which
has a few dozen holes in it where steam explosion has blasted
fragments elsewhere.

The internet suggests that the green material may be iron(II,III)
hydroxycarbonate, “carbonate green rust”.  (On previous occasions,
after filtration and drying, it turned into a very fine purple-brown
powder.).  After a few minutes it has defecated into a well-defined
layer at the bottom of the jar (about 12 mm deep out of 60 mm, if the
glass is 3 mm thick), which appears solid but is actually a fine
suspension that offers no resistance to being stirred with a knife.
The water above it is green and cloudy, but basically transparent.

I heated a piece of brass-wool dishwashing sponge (<500mg) with the
brass torch as a control, to see if it behaved the same as the copper.
It seemed to be, if anything, *harder* to melt, but it did emit a
little white smoke, and did not ball up due to crossing
sharply-defined melting points, but rather wilted.  It did form the
same kind of black oxide coating, though.  However, a white surface
deposit (presumably philosopher’s wool) was evident on the lower
layers of the result.  The burned sponge was crumbly rather than solid
as the melted copper wire had been, perhaps because it was thin enough
to oxidize most of the material rather than just a superficial
coating.

After a few minutes more of heating, the pops and hissing from the
soda ceased, and I was left with a bright white mass of soda, which
had crept up the walls a bit.  It had delaminated from both the floor
and walls of the thin stainless steel pot, and indeed evidently
detached from the pot in a single block.  As it cooled, it crackled
softly.

I flaked some soda off the wall and dripped some oil of lime on it in
my hand, then let it to soak in my hand for a few seconds.  No
reaction was evident, not even warming, but afterwards the flakes took
multiple washings over several minutes, clouding the water each time,
to dissolve completely in water.  By contrast, other similar flakes
mostly dissolved in water in a few seconds and entirely in a minute or
two.  This suggests that fairly insoluble chalk was formed, though not
enough in a few seconds to withstand multiple washings; chalk is not
as strong as the phosphates of calcium, but still a viable building
material.  If you wanted to do this with an inkjet printer, calcium
dinitrate might be a less corrosive source of calcium ions than oil of
lime.

Using a cut-off end of construction I-beam as a handheld anvil, I was
able to hammer one of the balls of copper flat, to perhaps 10× its
original area and 1/10 of its original thickness, without any
difficulty, although it cracked a bit around the edges.

96% ethanol is sufficient to remove residual adhesive from Emeth Línea
Gourmet jam jar labels, though it requires several seconds of soaking
and usually multiple tries.

I ground up the dried soda in a marble mortar and stored it in another
Emeth jar.

Oh, I realize I never recorded the ingredients of the Cif dishwashing
detergent, whose bottle looks like it’s made in the same factory as
the Magistral, maybe with the same blow molds: the surfactants, both
anionic, are linear sodium lauryl ether sulfate and sodium
alkylbenzenesulfonate.  The other ingredients are “pH regulating
agent, coadjuvant, viscosant, preservatives, sequestrant, colorants,
and perfume.”  Pretty shitty labeling if you ask me.

Mercado Libre offers [5 kg of technical grade sodium lauryl sulfate
for AR$7430][11] (US$41, US$8.30/kg), which is pretty close to the
US$10 I was guessing I was paying at the supermarket, without having
to dump the formaldehyde in it myself.

[11]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-930052011-laurilsulfato-de-sodio-5kg-_JM

Because the Wikipedia article on green rust mentions that it normally
oxidizes to iron oxyhydroxide, which is not green but more brown, and
because the stuff I’d made previously turned purple-brown, I sucked a
little of the green muck into a tube and put it in a bowl, then added
some drops of 30-volumes hydrogen peroxide to it.  It immediately
turned brown-black and foamed up a lot, which is consistent with the
identification as carbonate green rust.  It would be better to use an
oxidizer that isn’t itself inclined to foam up, I guess, so I could be
sure that it’s really releasing the carbonate.

The weird thing is that [the syntheses described in Wikipedia][12] are
a lot more involved than just dumping an excess of soda ash on some
green vitriol in a jar, so I wonder if there are impurities in my
fertilizer that predispose it to this.  Or maybe this hydroxycarbonate
isn’t very pure.

[12]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_rust#Air_oxidation_methods

This sounds more like the reaction [described in the (nearly
insoluble) iron carbonate article][13]:

> Ferrous carbonate can be prepared also from solutions of an iron(II)
> salt, such as iron(II) perchlorate, with sodium bicarbonate,
> releasing carbon dioxide:
> 
> > Fe(ClO₄)₂ + 2NaHCO₃ → FeCO₃ + 2NaClO₄ + CO₂ + H₂O
>
> Sel and others used this reaction (but with FeCl₂ instead of
> Fe(ClO₄)₂) at 0.2 M to prepare amorphous FeCO₃.
> 
> Care must be taken to exclude oxygen O₂ from the solutions, because
> the Fe²⁺ ion is easily oxidized to Fe³⁺, especially at pH above
> 6.0.

[13]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron%28II%29_carbonate#Preparation

Which, I mean, that’s pretty much what happened.

The hydroxycarbonate was a little stinky, same as last time.  I wonder
if that means the green vitriol is slightly contaminated with, say,
iron sulfide.

02021-08-26
-----------

The hydroxycarbonate has entirely defecated, leaving what seems to be
a perfectly clear menstruum, except that some of it is stuck to the
walls of the jar.  Siphoning this water out may usefully substitute
for a stage of filtering if the objective is getting the solutes.

It occurred to me that in fact electro-etching of copper in soda ash
solution may not work, precisely because copper carbonate is
insoluble.  If so, the sal mirabilis in that jar could be crucial.

02021-08-29
-----------

The cuboid of foam I put in to dehydrate a few days ago now weighs
700 mg, which I guess means that it wasn’t fully dehydrated at 900 mg.
The bowl seems to have remained reasonably well sealed with the foil;
the flakes of muriate of lime that were slightly damp before have now
become almost dry, just slightly shiny, and very firmly stuck to the
bottom of the bowl, and slightly discolored with what looks like iron
oxide rust.  Upon immersing the cuboid in tared water the scale read
7.0, indicating that its extra-pore volume is 7.0 cc; upon removing it
from the water, the scale read -1.1, indicating that 1.1 cc of water
had entered its pores; upon weighing the wet cube I get 1.8, which is
consistent with 1.1 g of water plus 0.7 g of cube.  So this foam
cuboid, when dry, is actually about 8.1 cc and 86 mg/cc.  Upon leaving
it on the scale a little while, turning the scale back on, and picking
it off, the scale reads -1.7 g, so about 100 mg of water seeped out of
the foam; upon drying the scale with a paper towel (should have used a
sample boat!) I get -1.8 g as expected.

Unfortunately I didn’t weigh the bowl of muriate of lime before adding
water to it to get rid of the muriate, so I can’t heat up the muriate
to see how much water I drive out of it (most of which was presumably
obtained from the cuboid).

To get relief from gastric reflux, I drank a little dilute
washing-soda solution earlier.  It was bitter, left my tongue sort of
tingling in a soap-like fashion, and left my throat more irritated
than before, so I probably should stick to baking soda.  (I took some
baking soda a little bit later.)  I was thinking it might be
interesting to try to saponify some butter with that soda, but
apparently this involves boiling it for 2–5 days, so I don’t think
I’ll do that.  Maybe I’ll make some soap with lye, but not tonight.

Maybe I can make boric acid (61.83 g/mol).  The usual borax is the
decahydrate (381.33 g/mol) and decomposes to the anhydrous form
(201.22 g/mol) at 75°, which then doesn’t melt until 743°, a
temperature with a deep-red glow.  In water you can dissolve
3.17 g/100 mℓ, I guess at room temperature.  Boric acid, by contrast,
doesn’t have a hydrated form and melts at 170.9° (well, dehydrates to
the almost insoluble metaboric acid, which melts at 236°), but
dissolves about 2.52 g at 0°, 4.72 g/100 mℓ at 20°, rising to
27.5 g/100 mℓ at 100°.  I don’t really understand pKa, but I think
that because boric acid’s (first) pKa is 9.24, acetic acid
(60.052 g/mol, pKa=4.756) should be able to convert all but about
0.003% of the borate in borax into boric acid by stealing off its
sodium for the highly soluble sodium acetate (82.034 g/mol,
119 g/100 mℓ at 0°, 123.3 g/100 mℓ at 20°, 162.9 g/100 mℓ at 100°).

The stoichiometry here is a little confusing.  I need one acetate per
sodium, and borax (Na₂B₄O₇·10H₂O) has two borons per sodium, so I
guess I have two borons per acetate.  But that tetraborate group needs
some extra hydrogen to break it up into loose boric acid molecules,
namely three hydrogens per boron, plus some extra oxygens (5 oxygens
per tetraborate) but acetic acid only provides one hydrogen per
acetate and no oxygen.  So I guess we have to get our other hydrogens
and oxygens from the water: Na₂B₄O₇·10H₂O + 2CH₃COOH → 5H₂O +
2NaCH₃COO + 4B(OH)₃.

So if I get a reaction product that crystallizes at anything less than
overwhelming concentrations, even at 0°, it’s either borax or boric
acid, and if the solution is still acidic, it’s boric acid.  And
ideally I should be able to get about 90% of the boric acid to
crystallize if I use a minimal amount of water to dissolve it.  (Even
if I were to crystallize it just by cooling down an excessive amount
of solution, the yield ought to be above 50% as long as I have less
than 100 mℓ of water per 5.04 g of boric acid.)  Anhydrous sodium
acetate’s boiling point is listed as 881.4°, so as long as I don’t
boil the stuff dry (and then overheat it to red hot), it ought to be
stable.

I don’t have a simple way to find out how much acetic acid is in my
vinegar, though, so I’d have to add an excess; acetic acid is entirely
miscible with water and boils at only 118°.

I guess I could see roughly how much vinegar is needed to neutralize,
say, a gram of baking soda (84.0066 g/mol).  (This would be a lot
easier with a better scale, but I guess I’ll just be very approximate
instead of carefully titrating.)

I added 1.0 g of baking soda to a tray (which initially weighed
2.2 g).  I added vinegar to a cup that initially weighed 8.2 g, with a
final weight of 53.7 g, so 45.5 g of vinegar.  By the time the cup
weighed 35.5 g (27.3 g of vinegar) the baking soda seemed to all be
neutralized (by the 18.2 g of vinegar I added), but not much before
that.  Let’s say somewhere between 13 g and 18.2 g.

In theory this is NaHCO₃ + CH₃COOH → CO₂ + H₂O + NaCH₃COO, a 1:1 mole
ratio between acetic acid and baking soda, so the 1.0 g of baking soda
corresponds to 60.052/84.0066 = 0.715 g of acetic acid, but given the
weighing imprecision of the scale, somewhere between 0.68 and 0.75 g.
Continuing the interval arithmetic, that puts us between 3.7% and 5.8%
acetic acid in this vinegar (*Alcazar vinagre de alcohol, acidez 5%*,
UPC 7-790130-000294).  I could probably take a second measurement with
more careful titration to nail that down to something like “4.3% to
5.3%” but I’m not going to, because this is precise enough to allow me
to ensure an excess of acetic acid with the borax without adding an
absurd amount of extra water, and I can harmlessly boil off any extra
water without losing any boric acid.

So suppose I want 100 g of boric acid, B(OH)₃.  I’d need 364 g of
water to dissolve it in.  This bowl I used to dehydrate the glass foam
weighs 42.5 g empty (it’s probably the bowl that weighed 42.3 g
before) and 562 g with an unreasonably large amount of water in it, an
amount almost certain to spill.  But looking at the equation above,
every mole of borax (381.33 g) requires two moles of acetic acid
(120.104 g) to neutralize it, producing four moles of boric acid
(247.32 g) and two moles of sodium acetate (164.068 g).  But 120.104 g
of acetic acid at my lower-bound 3.7% concentration would be 3300 g of
vinegar, and I have less than 500 g here, and at any rate if I used
that much it would spill everywhere when it came to a boil.

So suppose I use a more reasonable 200 g of vinegar, providing at
least 7.4 g of acetic acid.  That should suffice to neutralize 23 g of
borax, producing 15 g of boric acid and 10.1 g of sodium acetate.  If
I then just stick it in the freezer, the 193 g of water will only be
able to dissolve 4.9 g of it, for a theoretical 67% yield, but if I
boil it down to 100 g or 50 g or something, I should be able to
improve that significantly.

I weighed out 20.0 g of borax into an improvised aluminum-foil sample
boat, put it in the bowl, and weighed out 200 g of vinegar, then put
it on a low flame.  Some of the borax seemed to dissolve in the
vinegar at room temperature, but, as predicted, not most of it.  It
finished dissolving at about 01:17 as the vinegar warmed up a bit, at
a point where it was too hot to hold my finger in but did not burn my
finger in a second or two, perhaps 40–45°.  I continued heating it on
low heat a while longer, then decided to go for broke and boil it
rapidly with an aluminum-foil lid.  At 01:23 it weighed 244 g without
the foil lid, 246 g with it.  At 01:25 it weighed 232 g, and the foil
seemed to be doing a reasonable job at preventing liquid drops from
spraying out.

At 01:30 it had boiled down to 167 g (remember, 43 g is the bowl, and
1 g is the lid).  I took off the lid to see how it looked, like if
anything had precipitated, but it just smelled very acidic and looked
clear.  Unfortunately I tore the lid, which reduced the weight to
163 g, so about 3 g of condensation and spray went with the previous
lid.  I made a new lid (also about 1 g) and returned it to the fire.

7 minutes to drop from 244 g to 167 g is 11.0 g per minute, or more
realistically 8–16 g per minute.  If we assume that basically all the
power is going into boiling water, at water’s enthalpy of vaporization
of 40 kJ/mol and 18 g/mol, this is about 400 watts.

At 01:36 it was starting to sound syrupy, so I turned it off.  It
weighed 98 g, 96 g without the lid, which stuck a little to the bowl
as I tried to remove it.  Some drops that had splashed onto the side
of the bowl had crystallized into white spots, but they dissolved
rapidly when I sloshed the hot syrup over them.  I put the mix into
the freezer.  There was a strong smell of acid.

96 g should be about 53 g of solution, of which about 10.1 g should be
sodium acetate, about 13 g boric acid, some undetermined but fairly
significant amount should be acetic acid, some insignificant amount
should be borax, and the rest (less than 29.9 g) should be water.

At 01:45 I looked in the freezer; there is no visible precipitation
yet, except possibly some dust floating in the syrup.  Its viscosity
seems unchanged.

At 01:56 there was a lot of translucent white crystallization on the
bottom and some more floating around in the syrup, which actually
seems maybe a bit less syrupy now.  I made a gravity filtration setup
out of a couple of Monster cans and two coffee filters and stuck it in
the freezer to cool.  Empty, it weighed 27.6 g, but then I realized ⓐ
it actually had a drop of water in it and ⓑ was too tall to fit in the
freezer and ⓒ at any rate I was going to be filtering 40 mℓ of
solution and not 400 mℓ so I could cut it down a bit.  So I cut it
down to 24.0 g.

At 02:06 the fluid is quite milky from crystallization and seems to be
about the same viscosity as before, and it still smells intensely of
vinegar.  My plan is to dump the liquid into the filtration funnel,
then rinse the crystals stuck to the bowl with some 0° water, passing
that water also through the filtration funnel, and then set both the
bowl and the filters out to dry under a loose covering for a few days.

At 02:18 I did the filtering, but didn’t do a very good job of record
keeping because I was trying to do it all before things warmed up and
increased solubility.  If I recorded this correctly, though, the
filter funnel setup initially weighed 24.1 g, and I think the bowl
initially weighed 77.8 g.  After pouring the milky menstruum into the
filter funnel, it weighed 38.9 g, but I didn’t record the bowl’s
weight; it must have been about 63.0 g.  I added some 0° water to the
bowl, bringing its weight up to 86.0 g, which seems like a lot more
water than I should have added; after I poured that into the filter
funnel too, the bowl was down to 72.7 g, and then I knocked over the
filter funnel, spilling some of the menstruum onto the table and
bringing its weight down to 45.2 g.  I added more water to the bowl,
bringing it up to 80.2 g, and dumped that into the funnel, reducing
the bowl’s weight to 69.5 g, and bringing the funnel’s weight up to
58.4 g.  I should have weighed the water bottle at the beginning, too!

Afterwards the water bottle weighed 514 g; it’s a nominally 500 mℓ
Coke bottle, of a type which weighs 24 g including the PCO1881 cap.
On refilling it until only a small bubble is left, as before, it
weighs 555 g.  So the total amount of cold water I added was somewhere
in the neighborhood of 30–45 g.

Now I realize I should add some extra rinse water to the filter funnel
to wash water-solubles out of the filters.  I first reduced the weight
of the cold-water bottle so I could weigh it on the scale at 390.0 g,
and on adding some of it to the funnel apparatus, its weight increased
from 58.4 g to 105.2 g, leaving the bottle weighing 345.2 g, so I
transferred 44.8 g or 46.8 g of water from one to the other.  One of
those numbers must be wrong, because I doubt I spilled 2 g of water or
got it stuck to my hands, but on weighing the filter apparatus again
it weighs 105.0 g, and the bottle still weighs 345.2 g.  So, I don’t
know what went wrong, but it’s probably safe to say I added on the
order of 44–47 g of water to rinse the funnel.

105.0 g amounts to 66.1 g of rinse water, which will probably have
stolen about 1.7 g of the boric-acid product from the funnel.  It’s a
miracle there’s anything solid left in that coffee filter, but there
is.

To see if the wet product in the bowl is really boric acid, I spooned
about 0.2 g of it with a chopstick onto a 3.9-g bottom of a Monster
can and turned on the stove.  At first it dissolved a bit as the water
heated, then formed a white apparently amorphous foam as the water
boiled.  I scraped a little powder off the foam with a chopstick,
which landed on the aluminum.  No further changes were seen to the
foam or the powder as I turned up the heat, though the epoxy inner
liner of the Monster can started to smoke white, and my lungs started
to criticize me.  I blew a butane torch over the top of it to heat it
further and hopefully burn off the smoke, but this mostly had the
effect of heating parts of the foam to orange-hot and melting the
aluminum underneath it, at which point I turned off the fires and
opened the window.

This is uninspiring, more like what I had seen previously from heating
borax (in a less stupid and dangerous way, using aluminum foil) than
what I was hoping for from boric acid.  There was never a point where
it convincingly melted, even though it got to red heat.  The only
detectable difference is that it’s black instead of white (from the
smoke from the charring epoxy) and it’s perhaps a bit harder (but
maybe I reached borax’s melting point and thus collapsed superficial
bubbles, reducing porosity).

The remaining prediction to test, I guess, is that, after heating the
“boric acid” enough to convert it to metaboric acid or boria, it
should not dissolve in water; the solubility of the borax foams, by
contrast, was one of their most striking properties.  Accordingly, I
added most of the blackened remains of the “boric acid” foam to a cup
of warm (≈40°) water.  In a minute or so, they dissolved into black
sludge, which breaks up when the water is stirred.  So I think what I
have here is still just borax, contaminated with the toxic
decomposition byproducts of epoxy.  I threw it away.

Other candidate tests [suggested in some random lab handout][14]
include a flame test (which should be bright yellow for borax,
transparent green for boric acid) and conductivity in distilled water
(which I think ought to be very high for borax and very low for boric
acid, though the lab worksheet doesn’t actually say, instead being
phrased as an exercise).  The lab procedure used 1M vitriol rather
than vinegar but was otherwise equivalent.

[14]: https://www.dimanregional.org/site/handlers/filedownload.ashx?moduleinstanceid=8719&dataid=3359&FileName=Cycle%205%20Chem%201%20Lab%201%20and%202%20-%20Preparation%20and%20Characterization%20of%20Boric%20Acid.pdf

I tried the flame test and got a bright yellow flame that looked like
sodium.  However, I also got yellow flames from my iron wire and
carbon welding electrode when they were supposedly clean, though maybe
the yellow was a little less bright.  I also contaminated the bowl of
sample with the carbon welding electrode; when I dipped it in while
hot, it scattered carbon particles around.

A much simpler test would be to heat dry “boric acid” past 200°,
weighing it before and afterwards.  If it’s boric acid, which is
61.83 g/mol, heating to even a few hundred degrees will only drive off
the hydrogens, reducing its weight by about 4%.  If it’s borax,
heating it past 75° will dehydrate it from 381.38 g/mol to
201.22 g/mol, a 47% reduction in weight.  But I cannot do that until
it is dry.  A differential scanning calorimetry/thermogravimetric
analysis rig would be extremely helpful for this kind of thing.

It’s 03:40.  The filtering apparatus has mostly frozen; the funnel
part has a little icicle hanging down, and the receptacle in the
bottom is mostly a block of ice, with a little of some kind of syrupy
liquid on top of it, which is plausibly a low-melting solution of
water, acetic acid, borax, boric acid, and/or sodium acetate.  I guess
that means it’s not doing any more filtering at 0° or -20° or
whatever.  So I took it out of the freezer and left it to thaw on the
table, with a little aluminum foil over the top to keep dust from
falling in.  The idea is that when it melts, a little more filtration
will happen, and then I can remove the filters from the funnel and lay
them out to dry.

I found [an old article about boric acid purification][15] and [a new
CC-BY article about it][16].  The current article mentions acidifying
borax with vitriol, aqua fortis, oxalic acid, and propionic acid, but
not acetic acid, and also using membrane electrolysis.

[15]: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25129859 "A Method for the Separation and Estimation of Boric Acid, with an Account of a Convenient Form of Apparatus for Quantitative Distillations. Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 22, 167–176, by F. A. Gooch, 01886. 10.2307/25129859"
[16]: https://res.mdpi.com/d_attachment/processes/processes-09-00398/article_deploy/processes-09-00398.pdf "Solvent Extraction of Boric Acid: Comparison of Five Different Monohydric Alcohols and Equilibrium Modeling with Numerical Methods. Processes 2021, 9, 398. A. Balinski, V. Recksiek, and N. Kelly. 10.3390/pr9020398"

The *old* article, however, *does* mention acidifying with acetic
acid — but followed by a stage of evaporating to dryness, then
volatilizing the result with *methanol*!  Methanol seems to be
available [for AR$190/ℓ][16] (US$1.06/ℓ) as a gasoline performance
additive for hot-rodding, so maybe I can find it at an auto parts
store, but it seems like it’s a more specialty product than in the US,
and the HEET brand name (for its use as a gas-line antifreeze) is
nonexistent.

[16]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-734405232-metanol-para-autos-y-motos100-puro-_JM

However, Gooch seems to be concerned not with purifying boric acid but
with measuring the amount present, so he ends up turning it into
calcium borate to weigh it.  On the other hand, he has a *lot* of
helpful tips about this sort of work, mentioning for example “the
exceedingly delicate test with turmeric” for detecting residual boric
acid.  This is [mentioned in the ScienceMadness Wiki][17]:

> Boric acid reacts in alcoholic solution with two molecules of
> curcumin to form rosocyanine, a dark green ionic solid that forms
> deep red solutions.

[17]: http://www.sciencemadness.org/smwiki/index.php/Boric_acid

It seems like Gooch was forming (and distilling) [trimethyl
borate][18], which boils at 68°, but had no way to find that out.

[18]: http://www.sciencemadness.org/smwiki/index.php/Trimethyl_borate

It looks like boric acid is highly soluble in methanol and ethanol
(even without reacting with them), while borax is only slightly
soluble in ethanol.  So that might be a thing to try.

I took out another sample of 0.2 g or so from the bowl and dripped 96%
ethanol on it on a scrap of aluminum foil, letting the somewhat milky
liquid run onto a different scrap.  I set the second scrap on fire,
and got what looked like a pretty normal yellow blackbody diffusion
flame with a green aura around it, which at least vaguely suggests
some boric acid might be present.  Eventually the alcohol burned away,
leaving a white residue.  On heating this foil on the stove, the white
residue turned black, even though there was no epoxy available to
contaminate it.  I suspect that this was sodium acetate being charred,
which means that I didn’t rinse the bowl very well.  (Gooch mentions
that [sodium acetate][17] is soluble in methanol; apparently ethanol
also dissolves 5.3 g/100 mℓ of the trihydrate.)

[17]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_acetate

02021-08-31
-----------

The borax/vinegar material in the bowl has solidified and smells
strongly of vinegar, indicating again that it was inadequately washed.
The filtration funnel still has sediment in the filters; the menstruum
it filtered remains clear (but is hardly exposed to evaporation).

Yesterday I ate a can of mackerel and washed it out, but it retained a
strong fish smell.  I heated it full of water and sodium percarbonate
on an electric burner, which produced froth.  There was too much
sodium percarbonate to dissolve, which restricted the flow of water
near the bottom; this may have been a factor in the plastic can lining
bubbling up along the bottom where it was over the heating element.
It still smelled strongly of fish.  I left it full of dilute household
ammonia overnight, but today it still smells strongly of fish.  Now I
have put it full of dilute household bleach (taking care to rinse the
ammonia out first).

To a cup cut from the bottom of a Monster bottle weighing 8.1 grams I
added 40.4 g of the somewhat wet copperas fertilizer, removing a large
crystal that somehow got in there (presumably of copperas, but
possibly something else).  48.4 g was the final weight, so maybe that
was more like 40.35 g.  I added 151.2 g of tap water, which mostly
dissolved the copperas immediately, though the solution was a bit
murky.  Applying gentle heating does not seem to remove the
cloudiness, so it’s probably insoluble particulate contamination,
maybe the pyrites I suggested earlier might be aromatizing my iron
precipitation products.  Actually, gentle heating seems to have turned
it an opaque green-brown!  But there was no acidic smell, so the heat
surely isn’t decomposing sulfate ions.

Now I realize I should have tried heating it to dryness first to
quantify how much water there was in it; this ought be the
heptahydrate plus a bit.

To a yogurt cup weighing 7.1 g I added an egg white; afterwards it
weighed 41.6 g, suggesting that I have 34.5 g of egg white here.

I turned another Monster can into a filter-funnel setup and filtered
the warm copperas solution through it, spilling a little.  Much to my
surprise, there’s a green translucent mud at the bottom, apparently
copperas crystals.  The filtrate seems to be just as opaque as the
solution, so evidently this coffee filter is not doing a good job at
filtering out the particles, which I now realize may be precipitated
copperas.

To the can with the sparkling green sludge, now weighing 23.3 g
(16.2 g sludge) I added 81.1 g of water.  The crystals began to
dissolve immediately, but were not completely dissolved after a few
minutes when I spilled the whole thing on the floor.  This, however,
revealed that some of the crystals were stuck together in pale
blue-green granular masses, presumably from when I was heating them;
the sludge had hidden them previously.  These masses broke into a few
pieces when the can hit the ground.  The can, unspilled green water,
and crystals weigh 25.8 g (17.7 g sludge and water); I added another
21.3 g of tap water to try to dissolve them.

So evidently what happened was that I prepared a saturated solution of
copperas with some minor particulate contamination, then evaporated it
(failing to increase the solubility enough to desaturate) to
precipitate lots of tiny copperas crystals, which are now clogging my
coffee filter.  But the 151.2 g of tap water I added was evidently
capable of dissolving at least 40.4-16.2 = 24.4 g of the copperas
crystals, and probably more, since some of that 16.2 g of sludge was
water.  This works out to at least 16.1 g/100 mℓ but less than
26.7 g/100 mℓ; WP says its solubility in water is 20.5 g/100 mℓ at 10°
and 29.51 g/100 mℓ at 25°, ranging up to 51.35 g/100 mℓ at 54°.  So I
probably shouldn’t have been so ambitious with the quantities.

The granular masses and crystals to which I added the 21.3 g of water
mostly dissolved, so I poured the cloudy green solution to the funnel,
leaving only a single crystalline mass stuck to the side (dropping the
mass from 46.8 g, including the can, by 38.1 g, to 8.6 or 8.7 g) and
added another 24.4 g of tap water, which rapidly diminished the size
of the polycrystalline chunk, which dissolved in a minute or two.  The
pale green solution is still fairly cloudy, but I added it to the
filter.  The empty can weighs 8.2 g and has some green deposits on its
walls.

I poured the 228.8 of filtered liquid back in to the 8.1 g (!) empty
can and thence back through the filter funnel, except for some which I
lost.  I’m hoping that the particles clogging the filter will provide
me with finer filtration this time around.

It looks slightly clearer maybe.  I put 1.9 g of the egg white into
the empty can and added 7.5 g of the slightly clearer filtrate, for a
total weight of 17.6 g.  Yellow-brown, slimy transparent masses
started to coagulate in the solution; I was hoping for a precipitate
but I was not expecting it to be either brown, transparent, or slimy,
but rather hard and granular, with an octahedral crystal habit.

There is still considerably more particulate in the filtrate in the
funnel setup than in the copperas I’d started with, although I’ve
surely added much more water than evaporated, so I’m guessing that
whatever particulate formed when I heated the copperas solution, it
wasn’t just precipitated copperas.  It might conceivably be that I
oxidized some of the copperas, which would maybe explain the browner
color (it has a browner green color) but that shouldn’t precipitate it;
rather the contrary, WP gives [ferric sulfate’s solubility as
25.6g/100 mℓ][18].

[18]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron%28III%29_sulfate

The particulate in the funnel is a yellow-brown, maybe even a
baby-poop yellow, very different from the blue-green of the copperas
itself.  After 2½ filtrations through the same funnel the solution
seems to be getting a little clearer.

After 3½ filtrations it is definitely getting clearer.

I added a spoonful of salt and nine spoonfuls of vinegar to half a cup
of milk, which began to curdle into tiny curds.  I think it started to
thicken around six spoonfuls; at the end, it was very sour.  I set up
another Monster can as a filtration funnel with a coffee filter and
used that to filter the curds from the whey.

I tried to remove the full coffee filter from the funnel, but it
split, and I had to start again.  I spilled a little of the cheese.
The restarted filtration yielded a great deal of acid whey, somewhat
curded at first but later almost perfectly clear, which I neutralized
with baking soda and drank, despite its excessive saltiness and
perhaps excess of bicarbonate, which I then tried to correct with a
little lemon juice.  Finally I diluted it with Diet Sprite.  A white
powder that looks like baking soda was visible at the bottom of the
cloudy liquid, but the liquid was drinkable without difficulty.
Indeed, on adding vinegar to the white powder, it fizzes!  So it was
at least partly undissolved baking soda.

I managed to get a little cheese off the first, broken filter, and
scraped it off a plate.  It was quite agreeable, despite the strong
vinegar flavor.  This is definitely a process to keep in mind if I
ever have a fridge full of milk in a power outage.  Presumably I can
leach the vinegar out once I have it solid; I wonder if I could
preserve the milk with acid and sugar (and, say, chocolate) rather
than salt?  Maybe some citrus terpenes?

Something has gone wrong with the water supply, so I suppose I will
allow the various materials to repose until tomorrow; I no longer have
a way to wash my hands after handling them.  Hopefully the egg white
will not putrefy.  The little funnel full of cheese is gradually
dripping at about 2 Hz.

After an hour or two, the cheese finished draining.  It is still very
soft.

A few hours later the water supply is back.  After 4 filtrations the
filtrate is clear, looking like fake apple juice — still not the
blue-green color of copperas crystals, but definitely yellow-green
rather than brown.

02021-09-01
-----------

The copperas solution looks like slightly cloudy urine.

To the can where I had combined egg white with copperas before, which
looks like brown phlegm I coughed up once when I was sick, I added the
remaining 29.0 g of egg white, then 100.0 g of the copperas solution.
More ropy brown precipitate formed immediately.

Soaking the mackerel can in dilute bleach since yesterday seems to
have effectively deodorized it, which ammonia and (separately) sodium
percarbonate failed to do.  There *is* a little chlorine odor left.

Adding oil of lime to saturated clear solution of baking soda produces
effervescence and a precipitate, just as with ferrous sulfate and
baking soda; this despite WP claiming baking soda’s solubility is
9.6 g/100 mℓ and calcium bicarbonate’s is 16.6 g/100 mℓ.  The
precipitate appears white, being presumably chalk.  I suppose that
doing this in a dilute enough solution might produce large calcite
crystals.  See file `freezer-seacrete.md`.  I diluted the results with
water, and the chalk settled within a few hours, but remained
impalpably fine.  It adhered to the surface of the aluminum can a bit
and did not immediately dissolve in vinegar, but did dissolve with
mild heating of the vinegar.

By contrast, adding oil of lime to Diet 7-Up (*not* Sprite) produces
immediate effervescence but no precipitate, just as you would expect:
even though 7-Up is a saturated solution of CO₂, it does not react to
form CaCO₃.

The large dark green crystal I fished out of the copperas yesterday
has now dried to a sparkling light green; it looks like someone
sprinkled sugar on wasabi.

02021-09-02
-----------

The cheese is no longer wet, just moist.  It is delicious, similar to
an acidic ricotta.

The label of Doreé [sic] Capilar 30-volumes hydrogen peroxide (UPC
7-794050-007050) peels off the polyolefin bottle without leaving an
adhesive residue.  95% ethanol removes the lot number and expiration
date.  Now I have a 100mℓ hermetic polyolefin bottle.

The baby-poop brown precipitate from the copperas on the filter has
now turned brown.  Adding 30-volumes hydrogen peroxide to it does not
change its color.  This suggests it may have oxidized from ferrous to
ferric when I was warming it up, thus reducing its solubility (?).

02021-09-03
-----------

The dried bowl of borax vinegar is actually sort of soft and slushy.
I placed a little on a pebble of pumice, skewered on baling wire, and
heated it with the brass torch; it melted rapidly down into the pores
of the pumice, and with further heating converted the pumice surface
into porous glass.  There was a strong smell of vinegar.  The vinegar
charred into little balls of black on the surface of the pumice.  Then
the piece of pumice cracked, and a couple of flakes gradually hinged
away from the main block and then fell.  A third crack remained open
by a couple of millimeters.  Did the acetic acid attack the pumice at
high temperature, opening or widening cracks?  Did the borax?

I placed some oil of lime on the pumice, which soaked in.  On further
heating I saw an orange flame, and the pumice cracked again, right
through the middle, held together only by the baling wire.

I took an additional piece of pumice and dunked it in tap water, then
heated it in the same way, alternating between dunking and heating a
few tims.  It did not visibly crack, but on tapping it on a ceramic
plate afterwards, a piece fell off, evidently having been previously
severed by an invisible crack.

The surface of the pumice reached orange and yellow heat during this
procedure, but only melted where borax had been applied.

There was a bit of the “cockroach smell” I mentioned previously from
heating the oil of lime, and also an acid smell, which might have been
just more acetic acid.

The end of the baling wire was covered with borate glass from
previously, which liquefied and smoothed out in the flame.  It was
still warm enough to sizzle when I added the oil of lime; thereafter
it bubbled and had a pebbly surface in the flame, as if the glassy
calcium borate (or whatever it was!) was only yielding up its water at
orange heat.  Calcium borate could be pretty interesting: colemanite
(1:3 Ca:B mole ratio) is Mohs 4.5, piezoelectric, and fluorescent
yellow, and nobleite (1:6 Ca:B) is Mohs 3.  Sadly neither Wikipedia
nor Mindat bothers to mention whether either of them is water-soluble,
though [colemanite mixed with ulexite is a popular pottery glaze
ingredient known as Gerstley Borate][20].  [The US Borax MSDS for
it][21] describes it as “sparingly soluble”.

[20]: https://digitalfire.com/material/gerstley+borate
[21]: https://web.faa.illinois.edu/app/uploads/sites/6/2021/05/Gerstley-Borate.pdf

02021-09-04
-----------

I poured some of the sodium silicate solution into some dry
construction sand.

02021-09-06
-----------

I hammered flat some 60/40 Radio Shack lead/tin rosin-core solder
(barcode 40293-11311, Radio Shack part number I think 64-007 E) and
stuck it in bleach (*Ayudín agua lavandina común*, 25 g Cl/ℓ, UPC
7-793253-000400).  Also, a piece of aluminum foil.  After 30 minutes
no tarnishing was visible on either but the aluminum foil has some
small bubbles; I suspect it may be forming aluminum chloride.  I don’t
know how much chlorine is left in this bleach; it’s been sitting
around the house for quite a while.

The can of dissolved copperas has been sitting open since 02021-08-31
and has developed a non-metallic yellow-brown deposit at the bottom,
though the liquid is still clear.

I took a cut-off Speed can weighing 6.5 g and added 19.7 g of the
copperas solution to it, which appeared perfectly transparent, in the
sense of not being cloudy, but yellow.  Then I added 7.4 g of
30-volumes hydrogen peroxide, which immediately began to effervesce
and turned the solution apparently black and opaque.  A little while
later it was quite warm, red-brown, and perfectly transparent (in the
same sense) and weighed 33.4 g, gradually decreasing to 33.2 g (unless
that’s an error in my scale).  I conclude that I have made ferric
sulfate (since none of the iron oxides, hydroxides, or oxyhydroxides
are soluble) at a low enough concentration to not precipitate.

The mass loss so far is 400 mg, which is presumably a combination of
lost oxygen and evaporated water.

I placed the Speed can out of the way with a loosely-fitting
aluminum-foil hat to allow the solution to dry out without too much
dust falling in.  NIH says ferric sulfate should appear as “a yellow
crystalline solid or a grayish-white powder”.  If it takes more than a
week, I’ll try putting it in a sealed chamber with some muriate of
lime and let them fight over the water in the air; this is probably
going to be necessary because NIH also describes it as “deliquescent”,
and “decomp in hot water”.  A pH-1 solution of the stuff is apparently
used in Pakistan as a dental hemostat: “Known as the “classic”
hemostatic agent”!  It seems to be the right color from all the
pictures, too.

It’s been about 8 hours, and the bleach has eaten the aluminum foil I
stuck in it.  The lead-tin solder is still shiny, but there’s a white
deposit on some of it; I suspect this might have resulted from
galvanic contact with the aluminum foil.  Oops.

The sodium silicate I poured into the sand two days ago soaked through
about 20 mm of sand and formed a solid mass, which has not stuck to
the polystyrene container it’s in at all.  The mass looks a bit wet,
and when I squeeze it between my fingers, it yields and fractures,
revealing inner surfaces that look even wetter.

In theory I ought to be able to mix a fair bit of muriate of lime with
baking soda without getting chalk — until the solution dries out.
Chalk’s solubility is supposed to be 0.0013 g/100mℓ, but calcium
bicarbonate’s is supposed to be 16.6 g/100mℓ (162.11464 g/mol), more
than a thousand times higher.  Baking soda’s is supposed to be
9.6 g/100mℓ (84.0066 g/mol), and muriate of lime’s 74.5 g/100mℓ
(110.98 g/mol).  All these at 20°, which is a little warmer than it is
here at the moment.

I guess the saturated solution of calcium bicarb at 20° is 1.02 mol/ℓ.
For that we’d need 2.04 mol/ℓ of baking soda, 17.1 g/100 mℓ, which is
higher than its solubility (though the potassium or ammonium salts
could maybe do it directly), suggesting that the appropriate amount of
muriate of lime ought to *solvate* baking soda.  We’d also need
1.02 mol/ℓ of muriate of lime, which would be only 11.3 g/100 mℓ, 6.6
times more dilute than the saturated solution.

Maybe to understand why the large excess of calcium in the oil of lime
resulted in precipitation last time I need to understand solubility
products a lot better.  But I think this means that if I dilute the
oil of lime 7:1 and then add saturated bicarb to it, it shouldn’t
happen.

So I took a cut-off Monster can weighing 7.3–7.6 g (the scale can’t
quite decide) which can hold 227 g of water, and I added 12.1 g of oil
of lime to it, bringing the total to 19.7–19.8 g; this should contain
about 5.17 g of muriate of lime and 6.93 g of water.  Then I added tap
water to bring the total to 103.3 g, thus 83.5 g of tap water.  So in
theory I have 5.17 g of muriate of lime, .0466 mol, dissolved in
90.43 g of tap water, thus about .515 mol/ℓ.  I stirred it with a soda
straw; a little dust settled to the center of the bottom.  So now even
a totally saturated baking-soda solution shouldn’t cause effervescence
and chalk deposition.

.0466 mol of baking soda should be 3.91 g, which in theory would be
contained in 44.6 g of the saturated solution (44.7 g water).  So I
prepared a saturated solution of baking soda.  To the now 103.1 g can
(?!) I added 48.4 g of the solution (oops!) and... it turned cloudy
with what looked like chalk, but this time completely without
effervescence.  That was neither the outcome I hoped for (a clear
solution) nor the outcome I feared (effervescence and chalk).

So that should have been 135.1 g of water, 5.17 g of muriate of lime,
and 3.91 g of baking soda.  Oh, oops, that was half the amount of
baking soda I was supposed to use...

And, after a minute or two, it started to effervesce.  Ugh.  I guess
it just hadn’t reached the solubility limit of choke-damp, and that
*was* chalk after all.  It continued to effervesce for many minutes.

I guess I should actually measure the ingredients and the temperature
when I repeat this.

After a while the chalk had largely settled out, except for the
abundant dust forming aggregates on the surface of the water;
effervescence continued at a lower rate.  To get a better look I
dripped a drop of diluted dish detergent into the can, which
immediately scattered the surface dust to the edges of the container.
The water beneath was still pretty cloudy, but I can see down to where
the chalk has settled on the bottom.

Since I now realize I added half as much baking soda as I’d intended,
I added some more of the saturated baking soda solution.  The
effervescence increased dramatically again, suggesting that the baking
soda was indeed the limiting reagent.

It’s been a few hours, and a yellow-brown powder has precipitated in
the “ferric sulfate”, so maybe that’s not what it was, because it
certainly hasn’t evaporated that much.  Or maybe there was an excess
of hydrogen peroxide and now it’s producing insoluble iron oxide or
oxyhydroxide from the soluble ferric sulfate in solution.

02021-09-07
-----------

The chalk has settled out, leaving clear water with a thin layer of
chalk at the surface; maybe the chalk adsorbed the dish detergent.  I
took a 5.9-gram cut-off Speed can and added 10.0 g of the clear liquid
to it with a syringe which I think had previously been used to fill
inkwells.  No India ink contamination was visible.  Then I heated the
can on the stove.

The idea here is that if the chalk precipitated, whatever is left over
in the solution must be in equilibrium with the chalk.  Maybe it’s
calcium bicarbonate (and salt), just at a lower concentration than I
had thought would be soluble.  If so, I should be able to boil it down
to chalk (contaminated with salt), which should be recognizable by
virtue of being a white precipitate that bubbles and dissolves in
vinegar and does not dissolve in hot water.  And hopefully there will
be enough solids dissolved in 10 grams of the solution that I can
weigh it.

Adding a few more drops of dish detergent to the can where the chalk
was formed does not disperse the surface chalk, so I guess the chalk
didn’t adsorb the detergent, or the surface would have dramatically
cleared again as before.

After heating the chalk (? etc.) deposit in the can for a few hours
(mostly gently, because it was popping when I tried heating it
intensely) the can weighs 4.8 grams.  This suggests that the remaining
solid deposit weighs -1.1 grams, which is obviously wrong; maybe I had
something like 1.1 grams of water on it previously when I first
weighed it.  Then a flying plastic fragment bounced off the ceiling
and knocked it onto the floor, scattering an unknown amount of the
precipitate, so I guess I need to start over.

Both “nail enamel diluyent” and “enamel remover” are capable of
softening the pressure-sensitive adhesive that held the front
polarizing film onto this discarded laptop screen, allowing me to
scrape it into giant boogers with my fingernails, but neither actually
dissolves it.  Surprisingly, one or the other of them did attack the
polarizing film itself, damaging it (though it still seems to polarize
fine).  96% ethanol works dramatically better, softening the adhesive
much more quickly, allowing me to rub it into eraser-crumb strings
that peel off the plastic cleanly, and apparently not dissolving the
plastic itself.  Unfortunately, I ran out.  Fortunately, some
alcohol-based hand sanitizer gel was enough to finish the job.  The
plastic is still sort of foggy.

I diluted and tasted the citric acid from the health food store.  It
dissolves to perfect transparency in water and tastes like citric
acid.

02021-09-08
-----------

The waterglass-cemented sand from 02021-09-04 is now rock-hard and
survives being dropped on the ceramic floor without breaking.

02021-09-09
-----------

Although the waterglass-cemented sand from 02021-09-04 is rock-hard, I
can still break it by hand by flexion.  Heating it to orange-yellow
with the brass torch for a few minutes turns it from brown to gray but
doesn’t expand or soften it visibly, though it did settle a bit in the
vermiculite bed, I suspect because the vermiculite had some waterglass
or phosphoric acid sticking some of the grains together.  However, it
is now easier to break by hand, and seems to have some internal
porosity (it’s gray all the way through), so maybe it did soften
during heating; no such porosity was apparent upon breaking before
heating.  It gives the impression of poorly cured portland-cement
mortar: the outer surface where the flame impinged remains intact when
I rub my finger across it, but the inner porous mass instead releases
some sand.  It’s a bit more sparkly than portland-cement mortars
usually are, though.

People have reported that mixing rust powder with waterglass affords a
less intumescent refractory mix.

I have some litharge and glycerin here.  [Bain McKinnon’s 01933
dissertation at Oregon State][bm] reports (citing Harry A. Neville’s
“Adsorption and Reaction II: the Setting of Litharge-Glycerine
Cement”, J. Physical Chem., vol. 30, p. 1181, in 01926) that a 3:2
molar ratio of litharge (223.2 g/mol, 9.53 g/cc) to glycerin
(92.094 g/mol, 1.261 g/cc) produces the highest temperature rise,
exceeding 80° at times; but he finds that higher amounts of glycerin
produce stronger results.  I guess that means 670 g to 184 g glycerin,
or about 3.6 g of litharge per gram of glycerin.  [Apparently tin can
substitute for lead, and ethylene glycol for glycerin][tbpdr], and
with heating to 110° you can get metal glycerolates of [cobalt, zinc,
manganese, and iron, from acetates, carbonates, oxalates, oxides, or
hydroxides][rrst].

[bm]: https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/downloads/5999n5742
[tbpdr]: https://en.x-mol.com/paper/article/5814534
[rrst]: https://www.publish.csiro.au/ch/CH9701963 "Crystalline cobalt, zinc, manganese, and iron alkoxides of glycerol, by EW Radoslovich, MR Raupach, PG Slade and RM Taylor, 01970, Australian Journal of Chemistry, vol. 23 (issue 10 I guess) 1963-1971"

I heated a drop of the glycerin on the stove on a sheet of aluminum
foil.  At first it emitted a white smoke with a smell resembling
burning sugar; this could be ignited, at which point it burned with a
blurry yellow flame and emitted no further visible smoke.  Small
bubbles bubbled out of the glycerin as it burned, and at one point it
popped and threw smoking drops of glycerin around.  After a couple of
minutes it finished burning and left no visible residue, but the
aluminum foil had mostly melted.

To a 6.3-gram plastic cup (from Tregar yogurt) I added 7.3 g of
buff-colored hardware-store litharge (Indalo *litargirio*, UPC
7-798123-981544) and 2.1 g of glycerin (Indalo, UPC 7-798123-981483),
which I mixed for a couple of minutes with a q-tip to a stiff putty,
which nevertheless behaves like a (perhaps non-Newtonian) viscous
fluid.  This should approximate the 3:2 molar ratio mentioned above:
33 millimoles of litharge to 23 millimoles of glycerin.  No heating is
evident.

I’d tried mixing up this litharge and glycerin before, but the solid
mass initially formed fell apart into a powder after a day or two.
There aren’t a whole lot of things the ingredients could be other than
litharge and glycerin, though; not many things are dense enough to be
counterfeit litharge, though plenty are cheap enough.

The polarizing filter obtained from the front of the laptop screen is
evidently a linear polarizer with the direction of polarization being
the vertical dimension of the screen (the short dimension of the
film).  My own laptop’s screen (a Lenovo Thinkpad) seems to be
linearly polarized at about a 45° angle, and my cellphone screen
horizontally.

02021-09-10
-----------

The litharge–glycerin cement has set up solid, but it’s not very
strong; poking it with a q-tip bent the bottom of the yogurt cup
enough to crack it.  It’s still shiny as if it were wet; hopefully
this means it is nonporous (as it should be) and it will remain solid
this time and not crumble.  Mina reports that it has a strong smell of
paint.

The aluminum foil in bleach left a cloud of small dark particles but
otherwise is gone.  The solder in bleach has corroded significantly:
brown-black, like iron rust, where it was submerged, and a fairly
voluminous white that looks like fungus above the water line.  If I
had to guess, I’d guess the white was stannous oxyhydroxide, stannic
oxide, or plumbous chloride, probably not the last since it only
formed out of the water.  WP says stannous oxyhydroxide is “easily
oxidized to stannic oxide by air”; the chlorides of tin are white too,
but they’re highly water-soluble.  No idea what the brown-black
corrosion is.

In the evening, the litharge–glycerin cement is less shiny, with more
of a matte look.

I put some litharge, without glycerin, in the bottom of the deodorized
fish can and heated it on the stove.  No change was visible, but the
can started to smell of burning plastic.  In order to be able to
discard it safely, I added a layer of diammonium phosphate granules on
top and continued heating; this produced a noticeable aroma of ammonia
and a slight sizzling sound.  An aspirator for gas scrubbing would be
really helpful for this kind of thing.

After heating it gently for half an hour or so, there was no visible
change, but plenty of ammonia, so I decided to resort to more
aggressive measures.  I put some diammonium phosphate in a cut-off
Speed can and heated it with the brass torch, which melted it and
released a lot of ammonia vapors.  Worse, though, it released a lot of
burnt plastic fumes from the Speed can paint.  The mass of bubbling
phosphoric acid with phosphates of ammonia dissolved in it was black
wherever the torch did not heat it to orange heat.  After several
minutes and a visible haze of white smoke in the living room, I gave
up on this approach as well.

After cooling, the Speed can had a noticeable smell of acid, with a
mass of what appeared to be carbon foam on top of a whiter porous mass
of, presumably, a mix of ammonium phosphates and phosphoric acid.  I
rinsed it into the fish can with the litharge and fertilizer,
moistening the fertilizer (some of which had stuck to the litharge)
and added baking soda to the remainder, which fizzed enthusiastically.

The silicone flower Mina made on 02021-08-21 has faded from its
original lilac color to a pale cyan.  I think the magenta food
coloring in its surface has faded from exposure to light; Mina points
out that on the bottom, where it’s been exposed to air but not light,
it’s still lilac.

02021-09-11
-----------

The litharge/phosphate mix is kind of syrupy with white chunks and
smells like a rusty engine.  The phosphate/baking soda mix smells
acid, and on adding more water it resumes bubbling; maybe I didn’t add
enough baking soda to fully neutralize the acid, which I guess is less
surprising considering that it’s potentially triprotic.  The
litharge–glycerin cement still seems to be hard and is now even less
shiny, like dried “satin” paint.

02021-09-14
-----------

The litharge–glycerin cement has mostly remained solid, rather than
crumbling under its own power, but can now be crumbled like dried mud
under the pressure of a q-tip, which is similar to its previous
uninspiring performance and significantly less impressive than I was
hoping for.  Where it was exposed to light (with or without air) it
has darkened from its buff color to a darker, grayer color.  It pulls
away from the plastic yogurt cup (recycling triangle 6, polystyrene)
with only the lightest adhesion.  Its “satin” paint luster remains
unchanged.

I bit through one of the Oogoo samples I’d previously bitten on
02021-08-21.  If there is an acetic-acid smell, it is faint enough
that I can’t be sure it’s present.  It’s about 18mm thick in one
dimension, so probably the points nearest the surface were something
like 7mm away from the surface.

I rubbed the permanent marker spot off the surface of another of the
Oogoo samples, this one about 28mm in diameter, and cut it in half
with a razor knife; it too has no discernible acetic-acid smell.  I’m
not sure exactly when I made this one.

02021-09-15
-----------

The litharge-glycerin cement I unstuck from the yogurt cup yesterday
has largely lost the bisque or buff color it previously had
underneath, presumably due to being indirectly exposed to the sunlight
through the window for a single day.  I wonder if you could use this
property to make photographs?  It would be more useful if you could
stabilize it, but possibly you can; plausibly the photoreaction
product is something like lead dioxide or metallic lead, either of
which would be much less easily dissolved by acids than litharge
itself.

I added some more water and baking soda either yesterday or the day
before to the ammonia-scented Speed can containing the product of
decomposition of the fertilizer.  Later, I added some hardware-store
phosphoric acid (*Desoxidant fosfatizante TF3*, UPC 0-723540-593022,
water-clear with unspecified additives).  This induced effervescence,
showing that the baking soda hadn’t been entirely consumed.

02021-10-15
-----------

The various wet substances in open containers have dried up.  I have
thrown out some things whose identity I could no longer remember.  The
egg white with green vitriol is quite orange.

I tried heating up a flake of whitewash taken from some nearby
political graffiti with the brass torch.  I was able to heat it to
orange-hot, glowing visibly even in direct sunlight.  A smell of
burning paint (like linseed oil) ensued, suggesting that it was
contaminated with non-whitewash paint.  The hottest part gradually
crumbled away over several minutes.

02021-12-05
-----------

A laptop floppy disk casing seemed suspiciously light, leading me to
suspect it of being magnesium.  But filings cut from it with a hacksaw
do not ignite with the brass torch and do not react with vinegar, so
it’s probably just aluminum.  (At first the vinegar did not wet the
filings; some dish detergent solved that problem.)

I have had some coupons of corrugated cardboard from a cardboard box
floating in (originally) saturated aqueous muriate of lime for weeks
now.  The one I haven’t turned over still isn’t wet on top.  I added
another one to a bowl of just plain water a few days ago; it also
isn’t wet on top.  Normally I would have expected capillary action to
soak them through in a few minutes, so I guess they’re treated with
something to make them slightly hydrophobic.  I was hoping that the
calcium chloride would convert the sodium silicate adhesive into
water-insoluble larnite, but in fact the layers of cardboard peeled
apart in warm water just as easily as cardboard normally does, and a
little rubbing got it thoroughly wet.  I’m not sure if the *paper* is
delaminating or if the glue is, but either way the result isn’t a
water-stable cardboard as I was hoping.

02021-12-13
-----------

No visible reaction at first between the hardware-store phosphoric
acid and aluminum foil in a plastic yogurt cup, but after an hour or
two slow bubbling was detectable.  After some 10 hours most of the
foil had dissolved, leaving a slightly gray transparent liquid with
some scraps of foil floating on the top of it, so I added more foil.
I was expecting the foil to react, but not to dissolve — although both
aluminum and phosphate are trivalent, I think of aluminum phosphate as
a single material, one that’s extremely water-insoluble.  But in fact
there also exists aluminum dihydrogenphosphate (aluminum phosphate
monobasic, 磷酸二氢铝), which might be soluble; [American Elements
claims it is][aeadhp], and [Alfa says they sell it dissolved 50/50 in
water][aladhp], so it might be difficult to redissolve after it
precipitates, or perhaps disproportionate.

[aeadhp]: https://www.americanelements.com/aluminum-phosphate-monobasic-13530-50-2
[aladhp]: https://www.alfa.com/en/catalog/042858/

Also, I forgot to note this earlier, but the acid had no visible
reaction with oil of lime, presumably because the pKa of muriatic acid
is about -3.0 and the first pKa of phosphoric is +2.14.  I suppose
that if I partly neutralize it first with baking soda I should be able
to precipitate various phosphates of calcium.  Interestingly,
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disodium_phosphate> mentions a reaction
going the other way as well, preparing disodium phosphate from
“dicalcium phosphate” (CaHPO₄) and sodium bisulfate (NaHSO₄), which is
sold in hardware stores to lower the pH of your swimming pool.

Sodium bisulfate itself is a GRAS intermediate byproduct of the
Mannheim muriatic acid process, “an exothermic reaction that occurs at
room temperature”; on heating it transforms to anhydrous (58°),
pyrosulfate (280°), and finally sodium sulfate and sulfur trioxide
(460°).  It’s a dry powder at room temperature that aggressively
consumes azania.  Pyrosulfuric acid is interesting as a legal,
stronger alternative to sulfuric acid.  The bisulfate ion is also
available from thermal decomposition of azanium sulfate (250°),
everybody’s favorite GRAS thermally stable azanium compound — sold for
US$1/kg as a fertilizer, and made from gypsum and hartshorn by
throwing down chalk.

(Sodium *thio*sulfate, aka hyposulfite, Na₂S₂O₃, is a different
material: it’s a photographic fixer, reducing agent, and antidote to
cyanide poisoning together with sodium nitrite.)

(Sodium azanium sulfate dihydrate is “[a well known
ferroelectric][rrosasd]” and presumably the reaction product with
azania.  Presumably if you heat it you can expel the azanium and
regenerate the azanium absorbent.)

[rrosasd]: https://iucrdata.iucr.org/x/issues/2020/09/00/wm4138/ "cc-by"

Related to other useful materials to avoid witch-hunt persecution,
NaMnO₄ (V-2 oxidant, Condy’s Fluid) can reputedly be made from MnO₂,
NaClO, and NaOH, with an analogous route available for Ca(MnO₄)₂.
MnSO₄ is readily available as fertilizer (US$5/kg); the nitrate
(obtained, for example, by reacting with calcium nitrate) can be
decomposed at 400° to yield the oxide, which can be purified by anodic
deposition.  Dehydration of the lye using the oxide supposedly yields
Na₂MnO₄, whose disproportionation is another possible route, the one
originally used by Condy, but apparently a pentavalent manganese
compound is produced additionally or instead.

Another super fun material would be potassium ferrioxalate; hardware
stores sell “salt of lemon” to remove rust stains, and I guess it
works by complexing the insoluble ferric iron(III) ions, which I guess
should produce K₃(Fe(C₂O₄)₃)₂.  It’s fluorescent green (literally
fluorescent in solution) and decomposed by light or heat (reducing the
iron back to ferric), a property that can be used to used to make
blueprints as an alternative to ferric ammonium citrate (apparently
[Michael J. Ware invented this in 01994 and wrote a fascinating book
covering this and every other aspect of cyanotyping][cyanomicon]); the
ferric iron then reacted with the potassium ferricyanide to produce
insoluble ferric ferrocyanide, Prussian blue.

[cyanomicon]: https://www.mikeware.co.uk/mikeware/downloads.html

02021-12-14
-----------

Local textile pricing:

- Calico doesn’t exist.
- 180-thread-count *percal* at 260 cm width costs AR$7000/m on
  MercadoLibre; at AR$194/US$ that’s US$36/m or US$14/m².
- 1.6-m-wide polyester *polar soft liso* (polar fleece with a nap on
  it to soften it further) is AR$850/m (US$4.40/m, US$2.70/m²).  A
  roll is reported to be 22 kg and 50 meters, suggesting a weight of
  280 g/m².
- 1.45-m-wide *camisero* cloth falsely advertised as linen (fine
  print: 55% linen, 45% rayon) is AR$700/m (US$3.60/m, US$2.50/m²).
- 1.5 m *fibrana* floral-print rayon cloth is AR$430/m (US$2.20/m,
  US$1.46/m²).
- 1.5-m-wide 120-gram-per-linear-meter polyester *gasa muselina*,
  muslin gauze, is AR$370/m (US$1.90/m, US$1.26/m²).
- 160-m-wide raw cotton 20/20 *lienzo* is AR$350/m (US$1.60/m,
  US$1.12/m²).
- 150-μm-thick 1.4-m-wide flexible clear PVC film is AR$290/m
  (US$1.49/m, US$1.07/m²).
- [1.40-m-wide nonwoven polyester *friselina*][friselina], 45-gram
  weight (/m²? though an unhappy buyer reports that it’s actually
  20-gram cloth), goes for AR$2244 per 50-meter-roll (AR$45/m, 23¢/m,
  16.5¢/m²) in different brilliant colors.
- A week ago we went to town and found that burlap (*arpillera*) was
  AR$400/m² there (US$2.10/m²).  The other prices above are all
  MercadoLibre.  A MercadoLibre vendor offers 1-m-wide *arpillera
  yute* at AR$289/m (US$1.49/m, US$1.49/m²).

[friselina]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-877403579-tela-friselina-45-gr-x-50mts-140-de-ancho-tela-no-tejida-_JM

The *friselina* seems like probably the best material for anode bags
and similar filtering: it’s damned cheap, probably PET, safer and
cheaper than asbestos, perhaps more inert than glass fiber, certainly
more inert than any natural fiber, and PET is surpassed in its
inertness among the organic polymers only by polyethylene,
polypropylene and fluoropolymers, which are more difficult to find in
the form of cloth, though coarse polypropylene cloth is available for
carpeting and tarps.  (Some vendors also offer nonwovens which purport
to be both polypropylene and polyester, or blends of the two.)  It may
also be useful as a lint-free cloth for cleaning.

HEPA air filters are generally meltspun nonwoven polypropylene; this
is a possible alternative source for polypropylene fabric for anode
bags.  Surgical scrubs and lab coats are another possible source.

The reduction of Prussian blue to Prussian white (produced by fading
of Prussian blue by light!  and reversible by wet air exposure,
therefore inexhaustible) needs to steal an electron from somewhere, so
you can use it for photographic patterning of a surface by oxidizing
other random things in the environment.  I don’t think anyone has done
this.

02021-12-18
-----------

I heard the other day that you can electrodeposit aluminum from
aluminum chloride dissolved in molten methylsulfonylmethane, which is
easily available as a dietary supplement.  (Aluminum chloride by
itself won’t work at atmospheric pressure; it sublimes at 180°).  I
can’t wait to try it.

02021-12-21
-----------

Some time ago I deposited Elmer’s Classic Glitter Glue Silver (UPC
either 0-026000-185073 or 0-26000-18191, depending on which label you
believe; ingredients: deionized water, PVAc emulsion, polyvinyl
alcohol, and craft glitter (various sizes and colors); the US
marketing label lists no ingredients but apparently Argentine law
requires it) on a sheet of LDPE and let it dry.  As deposited, the
glitter flakes are dispersed almost isotropically, without any
preferred orientation, but upon drying (I’m guessing to about a tenth
of the original thickness, suggesting about 90% water content by
volume) the glitter flakes were mostly parallel to the surface as
indicated by their optical properties, ±10° or so.  The dried PVA/PVAc
mass peeled off the thin polyethylene sheet fairly easily, as you’d
expect.  (See file `pva-printing.md`.)  See file
`xerogel-compacting.md` for the implications.

To get a slightly more precise read on the water content than “about
90% by volume”, I took a polypropylene bottlecap weighing 1.7 g and
deposited 3.0 g of the glitter glue in it, for a reported total of
5.3 g (!? fuck this scale) and allowed to dry in the sun all
afternoon.  At night it weighed 4.3 g and was still noticeably soft,
though with a tough glittery skin, so I propped it up in front of the
air conditioner condenser fan.  I hope that will help it dry faster.

I also have a thin membrane of the dried glue (of mysterious origin),
thin enough to be almost entirely transparent, which I sprayed with a
saturated aqueous solution of borax.  Upon drying, it was crinkly and
“harder” than before; previously it was stretchy and “soft”, but now
it’s stiff and brittle.  I rinsed it again with water and it
immediately became a soft gel, coming apart a little, and now it is
drying again.

And I’ve deposited bits of the glue on some more LDPE, some aluminum
foil, a PET bottle, some polystyrene, and some ABS.  My expectation is
that, when dry, it will have failed to adhere strongly to any of them
and will be easily peeled off; “Elmer’s” (Newell Office Brands)
advertises that it's “ideal for paper, cloth, craft, etc.”

From Podsiadlo, 9 other authors, and Kotov’s work (“Ultrastrong and
Stiff Layered Polymer Nanocomposites”) in 02007, I learned that PVA
can be strongly crosslinked with glutaraldehyde; yesterday I learned
that glutaraldehyde can be easily bought from medical supply stores as
a heavy-duty disinfectant (typically at concentrations of 2–2.5%,
lower than the concentrations used for crosslinking).  It’s somewhat
hazardous to the humans because it’s great at crosslinking proteins
and they are made of proteins.  [Reportedly it does not reduce the
solubility of pure starch][slwgfclwg] because what it does is bond
amine groups to hydroxyls, so it can crosslink proteins to starches
but not starches to starches, but that can’t be the whole story
because PVA is nothing but a saturated carbon backbone with hydrogens
and hydroxyls, and evidently glutaraldehyde is great at crosslinking
it.  [10% chitosan apparently is effective at making starch
cross-linkable with glutaraldehyde][gmg].

[slwgfclwg]: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10924-020-01736-5 "Starch-Leather Waste Gelatin Films Cross-Linked with Glutaraldehyde, by Bianca Santinon Scopel, Gian Lucas Pretto, Júlia Isadora Postiglione Corrêa, Camila Baldasso, Aline Dettmer & Ruth Marlene Campomanes Santana, Journal of Polymers and the Environment volume 28, pages 1974–1984 (02020), 10.1007/s10924-020-01736-5"
[gmg]: https://mdpi-res.com/d_attachment/polymers/polymers-10-00985/article_deploy/polymers-10-00985.pdf "Reinforcement of Thermoplastic Corn Starch with Crosslinked Starch/Chitosan Microparticles, by Diana Paiva, André M. Pereira, Ana L. Pires, Jorge Martins, Luísa H. Carvalho, and Fernão D. Magalhães, Polymers 02018, 10, 985; 10.3390/polym10090985"

02021-12-22
-----------

The glitter glue pulled itself free of the LDPE, polystyrene, and
aluminum foil while drying.  From the ABS and PET it didn’t peel off
spontaneously, but it easily peeled off by hand.  In the case of the
ABS this may be because it was spread thinly over a rougher surface,
rather than because it had more adhesion.  Also, the polystyrene may
have a coating on it, and all the materials may be contaminated with
skin oil.

02021-12-23
-----------

The glitter glue bottlecap brought in from outside after two days of
drying in warm fan air weighs 2.6 g.  Upon separating from the
bottlecap the relatively dry glue weighs 0.9 g and the bottlecap a
reassuring 1.7.  This suggests that the 3.0 or 3.6 grams of glitter
glue I originally deposited was at least 70% water, but unless it’s
still retaining some water inside, it’s not close to 90%.

But honestly it probably is.  I should break it up and put it in a
desiccator with some muriate of lime.