I watched a Marco Reps video last night when I should have been
working and was surprised by his overpowered screwdrivers with goofy
animated OLED screens and 1500-watt quadcopter motors and the like.
It led me to thinking about what you could use the modern cheapness of
control electronics for in hand tools.

One semi-obvious example is impact drivers, which avoid disastrous
screwdriver camout by simultaneously exerting force axially “down”
onto the screw.  Traditionally these are operated manually with a
hammer, but there’s no particular reason not to operate them
internally with a spring, like an automatic center punch.  And if you
have electrical power, you could power it internally, like a hammer
drill or rotary hammer.

In an impact driver it may be necessary for the axial force to be
large: it must be larger than the camout force generated by the
inclined planes, and the rotary force normally needs to be large
enough to overcome the screw’s stiction, which is possibly larger than
normal due to the axial force (so increasing the axial force without
bound makes things worse).  However, the requirement on the impact
*energy* is minimal: it needs to be enough to overcome stiction.  But
you could imagine that, at least for some screws, a very large number
of impacts with very high peak force but low energy would work
adequately.  In the limit you’re approaching ultrasonic sonication of
the screw as you twist it, making this a real-life “sonic
screwdriver”.