(Comment on
<https://hackaday.com/2021/10/27/vcf-east-2021-preserving-heathkits-8-bit-computers/>.)

My H8 was hooked up to an H19 terminal and H17 floppy drives, so the
experience was similar to using a TRS-80 or an IBM PC. On HDOS there
were Microsoft BASIC, the less capable Benton Harbor BASIC, lots of
video games using the semigraphics character set (and the H8’s
built-in speaker), text editors called PIE and SCRIBE, text formatters
similar to nroff called TEXT and RUNOFF, and text files traded on disk
at user-group meetings, including porn. For electronic engineering,
you could do a lot of calculation and simulation in BASIC that would
have been really hairy on a programmable calculator, although its
ability to plot graphs on the screen was pretty limited.

I was a kid, so my favorite use was the games (and the porn). My
favorite games included Munchkin (a Pac-Man clone), Invaders,
SEABATTL, A Remarkable Experience (a puzzle-solving text adventure
similar to ADVENT or Zork), CASTLE, and Star Trek, where you would fly
around shooting Klingons with your phasers and photon torpedos and try
not to fly the Enterprise into a star. Other games I played included
Lunar Lander, Hammurabi, Towers of Hanoi, Reversi, chess, and a
significantly enhanced non-turn-based version of the "robots" game in
the bsdgames package.

Under CP/M there was WordStar, a mostly WYSIWYG word processor with
only a few nroff-style dot commands left, and SuperCalc, a
spreadsheet. There was a huffman-coding utility called
SQ[ueeze]. Later I installed MODEM7 under CP/M and dialed up BBSes
with a modem, and I could upload and download files with
XMODEM. Sometimes, though, I couldn’t download a file unless the BBS
sysop was kind enough to break it up into pieces that were smaller
than the (100KiB) floppy disks.

Despite the availability of PILOT, effectively everything that wasn’t
written in BASIC was written in assembly language; both HDOS and CP/M
came with an assembler, a linker, and a library facility to pull only
the library routines you needed out of a library. Later on BDS C and
Turbo Pascal brought high-level languages to the platform, but they
were too late and not competitive in performance with assembly
language or beginner-friendliness with BASIC. Unfortunately, I never
learned how to program in assembly.