Nuclear energy is the Amiga of energy sources.

Ahead of its time, it was unjustly rejected and persecuted by the
ignorant masses. Its advocates are bonded by the quiet pride that at
least they weren’t unthinkingly siding with those masses. (And they’re
right!) Meanwhile, as the Amiga stagnated for terribly unfair reasons,
other, scrappier technologies like the i386 and UMG-Si grew from being
worthless boondoggles (except in special circumstances, like
spaceflight) to being actually far better and cheaper. But the Amiga
advocates keep the faith, sharing their suffering and resentment. They
inevitably try the alternatives a little and perhaps even start to
like them. Gradually their denial recedes, decade by decade.

But they know that however much fab costs go down and leave their
beloved Amiga behind in the dust, you’ll never be able to run nuclear
submarines and Antarctic research stations on solar panels.

— ⁂ —

Not all nuclear-energy advocates are so unversed in the basics of
energy as to say incoherent things like “replacing daily energy
consumption from crude oil will require 14.5 terawatts per day” or
pants-on-head things like “renewable mandates push up electricity
prices”
(<https://freopp.org/why-nuclear-power-not-renewables-is-the-path-to-low-carbon-energy-part-1-c0b66d4b9570>)
but today they are all suffering from serious fact deficiencies.

— ⁂ —

Wind, where available, undercut the cost of steam power (including
nuclear and coal) a decade ago, and PV undercut it in equatorial parts
of the world about four years ago, or in even more of the world if you
don’t include storage. As a result, last year, China, whose electrical
consumption has doubled in the last decade, built 48.2 gigawatts† of
new photovoltaic capacity last year
<https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-energy-climatechange-idUSKBN29Q0JT>
but only has, I think, something like 10 GW of nuclear plants under
construction, scheduled to come online over the next several years. PV
installed capacity in China is growing by 23% per year, the same rate
it has been growing worldwide for the last few years; with some luck
that will return to the 39%-yearly-worldwide-growth trend that has
been the fairly consistent average over the last 28 years.‡

(Previous versions of this comment were posted at
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26218673>,
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26674832>, and
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=27503120>.)

______

† China’s PV capacity factor seems to be only about 13%, so those 48
GWp probably work out to only about 6 GW average. It would be nice if
China managed to site its new PV plants in places that could provide a
capacity factor like California’s 28%.

‡ Why 28? Because I haven’t found figures yet on what worldwide
installed capacity was in 01992 or earlier.