If you want to form phosphates of calcium, magnesium, or aluminum with
a reaction between a finely divided solid and a liquid, for maximum
strength, it would be desirable for a maximum amount of the reaction
mass to be incorporated into the final phosphate product, and a
minimal amount to be lost as waste products.  But you’d also like the
reaction product to not be too much larger than the original finely
divided solid.

What would the ideal materials be?

Phosphate sources
-----------------

The phosphate anion alone has a molar mass of 94.9714 g/mol.

Monoammonium phosphate has a molar mass of 115.025 g/mol (containing
one phosphate, so it’s 83% phosphate by weight), weighs 1.80 g/cc,
dissolves 36g in 100ml of water at 20°, and dissolves 173g in 100ml of
water at 100°.  So one ml of solid MAP contains 1.49 g of phosphate.
It decomposes at 200°.

Diammonium phosphate is 132.06 g/mol (72% phosphate) and 1.619 g/cc,
dissolves 57.5g/100ml at 10°, and decomposes at 155°.  So one ml of
solid DAP contains 1.16 g of phosphate.

Phosphoric acid, of course, has a molar mass of 97.994 g/mol and also
contains one phosphate, so it’s 97% phosphate.  Its density is 1.834
g/cc when solid.  It dissolves 548 g per 100ml of water at 20°, and
melts at 40-42.4°, so above that temperature no water is needed at all
to make it liquid; but dehydrating it can be very difficult.  One ml
of solid phosphoric acid contains 1.78 g of phosphate.

Trisodium phosphate is 163.939 g/mol (58% phosphate), has a density of
2.536 g/cc (when not hydrated!), and dissolves 12g/100ml of water at
20° or 94.6g/100ml at 100°.  So one ml of solid TSP contains 1.47 g of
phosphate.

Disodium phosphate is 141.96/mol (67% phosphate) and 1.7 g/cc and
dissolves 7.7 g/100ml at 20°, so one cc of it contains 1.14 g of
phosphate.

Calcium sources
---------------

Calcium weighs 40.078 g/mol.

Calcium chloride is 110.98 g/mol (36% calcium) and weighs 2.15 g/cc
(0.8 g Ca/cc), and water dissolves 74.5 g/100ml at 20°.  It’s also
soluble in acetic acid, ethanol, methanol, pyridine, all kinds of
crazy stuff.  It’s a sticky pain in the ass to dry out, though.

Slaked lime is 74.093 g/mol (54% calcium) and 2.211 g/cc, so each cc
contains 1.2 g of calcium.  At 20° water only dissolves 0.173 g/100ml
of it, but apparently it’s soluble in glycerol?

Quicklime is 56.0774 g/mol (71% calcium) and 3.34 g/cc (2.4 g Ca/cc)
but reacts with water rather than dissolving in it.

Calcium nitrate is 164.088 g/mol (24% calcium) and 2.504 g/cc, so each
cc contains only 0.6 g of calcium.  Water dissolves 121 g/100ml at 20°
or 271g/100ml at 40°.

Calcium acetate is 158.166 g/mol when anhydrous (25% calcium) and
1.509 g/cc (0.4 g Ca/cc) but very hygroscopic, dissolving 34.7 g/100ml
in water at 20°.

Calcium formate is 130.113 g/mol (31% calcium) and 2.02 g/cc (0.6 g
Ca/cc) and water dissolves 16 g/100ml at 0°.  It decomposes at 300°.

Aluminum sources
----------------

Aluminum itself weighs 26.9815384 g/cc, and is a candidate source for
aluminum ions.  However, it ordinarily resists attack by phosphoric
acid reasonably well.

Aluminum trihydroxide is 78.00 g/mol (35% Al) and 2.42 g/cc (0.8 g
Al/cc).  It starts releasing its hydroxyls at 300°.  Water only
dissolves 0.1 mg/100ml of it.

Sodium aluminate is 81.97 g/mol (33% Al) and 1.5 g/cc.  Its advantage
over the hydroxide is that it’s highly water-soluble, especially at
high temperature and pH.

(Di)aluminum (tri)sulfate (papermaker’s alum) is one of the standard
water-soluble aluminum salts; it weighs 342.15 g/mol (15.8% Al) when
anhydrous, and 2.672 g/cc.  Water dissolves 36.4g/100ml of it at 20°,
making it acidic.

Aluminum (tri)chloride is the other, even more soluble one; it weighs
133.341 g/mol (20% Al) (when anhydrous) and 2.48 g/cc (0.5 g Al/cc).
Water dissolves 45.8 g/100ml at 20°.  Interestingly, the anhydrous
form sublimes at 180°, suggesting the possibility of *gassing* a
mixture with aluminum.  However, you cannot dehydrate the hexahydrate
by heating it, and the anhydrous compound fumes in moist air!  You
have to form the anhydrous form anhydrously, perhaps via SHS from
copper chloride an aluminum metal.

There are also soluble acetates of aluminum.

Aluminum *oxide* weighs 101.960 g/mol (53% aluminum) and can be
extremely stable, or it can be relatively reactive, depending on how
it’s been treated since it was formed.  It’s totally insoluble in
anything.

Phosphate sinks
---------------

Tricalcium (di)phosphate, one possible end goal, is 310.18 g/mol
(containing two phosphates, so 61% phosphate by weight, the rest being
calcium) and weighs 3.14 g/cc.  Its solubility in water is 1.2 mg/kg,
which I guess is 0.12 mg/100ml.

Monocalcium (di)phosphate, another, is 234.05 g/mol when unhydrated
(81% phosphate) but tends to disproportionate into phosphoric acid and
“dicalcium” (di)phosphate, especially above 203°.  It’s dramatically
more water-soluble than the tricalcium salt, at 2 g/100ml.  Soluble
acid monobasic phosphates like this may be useful not only as
phosphate sinks but also as phosphate sources to calm down the
reaction with things like calcium oxide, which might otherwise be too
violent.

Dicalcium (mono)phosphate, a third, is actually CaHPO4, 136.06 g/mol
(70% phosphate).  [WP says][0]:

> In a continuous process CaCl2 can be treated with [diammonium
> phosphate] to form the dihydrate:
> 
> CaCl2 + (NH4)2HPO4 → CaHPO4•2H2O + 2NH4Cl
> 
> A slurry of the dihydrate is then heated to around 65–70 °C to form
> anhydrous CaHPO4 as a crystalline precipitate, typically as flat
> diamondoid crystals, which are suitable for further processing.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dicalcium_phosphate

There’s also a “dicalcium diphosphate”, to which it converts when
heated to 240°-500°, which is actually calcium pyrophosphate.

Aluminum orthophosphate (AlPO4) weighs 121.9529 g/mol and 2.566 g/cc,
thus being 78% phosphate and 22% aluminum, and containing 2.0 g/cc of
phosphate and 0.57 g/cc of aluminum.

Monoaluminum phosphate is commonly used as a refractory cement since
Kingery’s dissertation, but unfortunately is not in Wikipedia.

Fillers
-------

The idea of all this stuff is to form a lasting solid precipitate,
especially for 3-D printing applications.  There are several possible
problems to solve.

The first is reactions that are too slow and allow the materials to
escape.

The second is reactions that complete adequately fast, but do not
produce enough solid product to form a solid mass.

The third is reactions that are too *fast* and throw the materials
apart rather than producing a solid product.

The fourth is that the phosphate material, even when fully formed, may
not be very strong, or may have other undesirable properties such as
being electrically insulating.

Inert fillers should help with all four of these problems.  The filler
particles impede diffusion and convection, allowing more time for the
reaction to complete.  The new crystals need only bridge the existing
filler particles together rather than interlocking with other new
crystals.  The filler particles add a great deal of thermal mass and
reduce the temperature rise associated with any exothermic reaction,
allowing even very exothermic reactions to take place safely in the
insterstices.  And they can contribute many, though not all, desired
properties to the finished product.

Kingery’s dissertation used kaolin and quartz sand as fillers for his
various refractory “bonds” such as monoaluminum phosphate.

Wet-ground vermiculite may be an expedient functional filler for this
purpose, since vermiculite is easy to find and wet grinding is easy to
do.  I suspect that talc and clays are probably superior for most
purposes.

Other promising fillers include apatite, berlinite, synthetic aluminum
phosphates, sapphire, quartz sand, mullite, glass fiber, basalt fiber,
carbon fiber, recycled glass, glass microspheres, graphite, carbon
black, carborundum, and zeolites.
