I’ve been thinking about using rock wool as a cheap fibrous
reinforcing filler, but it’s difficult to find information about its
strength.  [A study in 01996 by Cáceres, García Hernández, and
Rincón][0] tested some rock wool fibers they’d made in their
laboratory from Canary Islands basalt, using what seems to have been a
sort of 10,000-rpm graphite cotton-candy machine they didn’t include a
drawing of, getting 639 and 717 MPa, with Young’s modulus of 89 and 86
gigapascals.

I don’t know if this is comparable to the strength of commercial
rockwool, but it’s a few times [higher than mild steel][1] (A36 is 250
MPa) and a few times lower than Spectra (2500-3500), basalt fiber
(4840), or S-glass (4710), and *much* higher than polypropylene
(12-43), PMMA (72), or HDPE (26-33).  They remark that it’s lower than
other people report for basalt fibers, but point out that frictions
among the fibers in the wool would be expected to provoke surface
defects and breakage.

[0]: https://materconstrucc.revistas.csic.es/index.php/materconstrucc/article/download/530/578 "Caracterización de fibras en forma de lana de roca para aislamiento obtenidas a partir de basaltos canarios / Characterization of fibers as rockwool for insulation obtained from canary islands basalts, 01996-03-21, José M. CÁCERES, J.E. GARCÍA HERNÁNDEZ; Dpto. de Edafología y Geología, Univ. La Laguna, Tenerife, J.M. RINCÓN; Lab. Materiales Vitrocerámicos (LETCC-CSIC), Materiales de Construcción, Vol. 46, nos. 242-243, abril/junio - julio/septiembre 01996, CC-BY-NC"
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultimate_tensile_strength

The [Young’s modulus][3] they report is higher than concrete (30 GPa),
bone (14), wood (9-12), plastics (0.228-3.5), magnesium alloy (45.2)
or pure aluminum (68); similar to tooth enamel (83), Kevlar (70-112),
carborundum (90-137), or stinging nettle fiber (87); and lower than
brass (106), bronze (112), copper (110), titanium (116), or A36 steel
(200).

[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young%27s_modulus

A few different papers report that incorporating rock wool into
plastics weakens them; for example, [Aykanat and Ermeydan][2], which
incorrectly claims that PLA biodegrades in 2-4 weeks, and didn’t use
any coupling agents.  Also they seem to have gotten a lot of porosity
in their PLA.

[2]: http://jise.btu.edu.tr/en/download/article-file/1069323 "Production and Characterization of Polylactic acid/Rock wool Biocomposites by Onur AYKANAT and Mahmut Ali ERMEYDAN, 02020-04-10, J Inno Sci Eng, 2020, 4(1): 1-10, 10.38088/jise.691237"
