I was watching some videos the other day of factories in Sialkot,
Pakistan, and I was especially interested in the vises used in one
factory.  It’s common to turn vise screws with a sliding round rod
permanently stuck through a round hole at one end of the vise screw,
but these guys just had the round hole; to turn the screws they had a
portable long L-shaped round-rod handle with a right-angle hook on the
end of it.  By passing the hook through the hole in the vise screw,
they had a variable-angle lever available; without removing the hook
from the vise, the handle could then be rotated to be parallel to the
vise screw, perpendicular to it, or anywhere in between, thus
providing them with whatever mechanical advantage they wanted, up to
the limit of the handle’s length.

In file `swashplate-screwdriver.md` in Derctuo, I described a way to
achieve the same thing with a mechanism inside a screwdriver.  But I
thought this idea of drilling a hole through screw shafts to turn
them, rather than sawing a slot in the head, was appealing.
Unfortunately, I don’t think it’s compatible with screw heads being
driven in flush with a surface.

The Robertson square drive, Allen hex drive, and Torx drive approaches
are also appealing, and although they don’t inherently offer variable
leverage, with ball-head screwdrivers they do offer the possibility of
off-axis driving, like a sort of universal joint.

With such hole-based systems, there’s a three-way tradeoff between
screw-head strength, screwdriver strength, and screw-head size.
Making the screwdriver head larger without changing the screw-head
size makes the walls of the screw thinner, thus reducing their
strength, at least when they are not fully counterbored into equally
hard material.  Ultimately the strength of the screw against torsion
is limited by its material and diameter — enough torsional load, and
the head will twist off — but, in grub-screw-like cases where the
screw head is not larger than the rest of the screw, I think the weak
point is either the screw head itself or the screwdriver shaft where
it enters the screw head, because these both must have scantier
cross-sections than the solid neck.

I wonder if you can get some advantage by making a very deep hole
drive, perhaps going all the way to the end of the screw.  This would
unavoidably weaken the screw, though.  If you can’t, is there a
natural limit on how deep you can go before you stop gaining an
advantage?

In hole-based screw heads like Torx, you could make the screwdriver
head slightly helical in order to pull the driver down into the screw
head as you’re twisting it, by way of elastic deformation of the screw
head.  This would work best if you had separate screwdriver and
screwundriver heads with helices in opposite directions, so that an
increase in available force in one direction doesn’t translate to a
decrease in the other direction.

By making the hole in the outermost part of the screw head circular
and gradually tapering it into the shape of the square, Star of David,
etc., you could make the screwdriver auto-align to the screw head’s
rotational position as it is inserted, at least if the user is
providing enough torsional compliance during insertion.  This would be
very convenient, especially for screws you can’t see.  Similarly, you
could taper the hole outward to the full diameter of the screw head so
that the screwdriver auto-aligns to the screw head’s translational
position as it is inserted, as box-end wrenches have done (on the
wrench side) for many generations.

Probably a buttress thread profile like the ones used on toothpaste
tubes would be a better default (for fasteners, maybe vises and the
like too, though they might be better off with planetary roller
screws).  I think it roughly doubles the screw thread’s strength
against pullout.

All in all, though, I think screw fasteners were a mistake.  Much of
the above also applies to camlocks, scroll drives, etc.
