I understand that the usual single-component RTV acetic-cure silicone
cures by hydrolyzing silyl acetates, consuming water in the process,
normally from the air (and producing acetic acid).  That’s why it
doesn’t cure in the tube and why it takes a long time to cure if you
spread it too thick.

It occurred to me that this affords a simple silicone 3-D printing
process: first, you make a big block of the liquid silicone in a cup,
and let it skin over the top.  Then, you insert a hypodermic into the
silicone through the skin to the bottom of the cup, withdrawing the
needle while injecting water.  By repeating this process you can
create water bubbles at different locations in the silicone mass,
close enough together that the silicone around them will join into a
continuous object when enough of it is cured by the water.  Once the
curing has proceeded to this point, you must remove the uncured
silicone; Smooth-On recommends acetone or mineral spirits (naphtha or
Zippo fuel), while others report that ethanol works too, and some even
report success with ordinary aqueous detergents (Dow Corning DS-1000
Aqueous Silicone Cleaner is such a formulation).  GE recommends
mineral spirits or "rubbing alcohol" (probably 70% isopropanol).

This kind of needle injection of reagent into a gel or viscous liquid
is much more broadly applicable.  You can thus inject dyes into jello,
for example (according to _Soonish_); or you can inject carbon dioxide
or calcium chloride into a green body of quartz sand lightly moistened
with soluble silicates, which will harden the silicates immediately;
or you can inject cold plasma (of air, for example) into a wide
variety of powders to activate the surfaces of powder particles to get
them to clump together;
