Platy clay crystals, for example of bentonite, are common functional
fillers in filled polymer systems, among other things because they
decrease permeability (if well bonded to the polymer matrix) they
provide enormous strength.  Each clay grain has quartz-like mechanical
properties in its two long dimensions, due to its phyllosilicate
structure.  The individual clay grains have very large aspect ratios,
which allows them to transfer the large loads they can withstand to
the polymer matrix over a large contact area.  However, they are
normally limited to fairly low volume fractions in the filled system
because their orientation is random, which limits the strength that
can be achieved by the resulting composite material.

One researcher whose name I can’t recall at the moment (though he was
polite enough to answer my email, years ago) was able to deposit
grains of bentonite all in parallel planes, bound together by
something like limpet glue, with the result that the resulting
composite material had a very high volume fraction of clay particles,
and thus a very high strength and stiffness; he had to devise a new
means for testing the stiffness by measuring small displacements under
a microscope, using a bunch of glass spheres stuck to the film of
material as the load was applied, then writing software to analyze the
images to measure the displacement.  But his procedure was extremely
slow, depositing one layer of clay on the surface at a time.

I just thought of a process which might be faster, although it still
deposits layer by layer.

The clay particles with appropriate surface treatment are suspended in
a resin dissolved in a solvent.  This is spin-coated onto a substrate,
which orients the clay particles parallel to the surface of the thin
layer, then heated to drive off the solvent, leaving a layer of solid
resin and clay particles.  The heating time needs to be long enough
for the solvent to diffuse out from underneath clay particles.
Another layer is applied on top of the first, and similarly dried, and
the process is repeated many times.  If the clay particles are 10% of
the original dispersion, but the solvent is 85% of it, then after the
solvent is removed, the clay particles will have a volume fraction of
some 67%, which should be enough to have clay particles on each layer
overlapping particles on the previous and next layers enough to form a
continuous filler network.

Two possible improvements are relevant.

First, after evaporating each solvent layer, the new surface is washed
before the next spin-coating step long enough to remove some of the
resin just deposited.  This will preferentially remove resin that is
not underneath a clay particle, although if continued long enough it
will remove clay particles too.  So there’s a certain range of washing
intensity within which this change will give a higher volume fraction
of filler in the final product.

Second, although the resin used is still solid when the solvent
evaporates, it is a photopolymerizable precursor to another resin.
This permits a higher-strength final product by photopolymerizing the
whole thing at the end, as well as 3-D printing by selective
photopolymerization of each layer, which in that case would also need
to include UV absorbers to keep the photopolymerization at the
surface.  See file `two-binder-powder-bed-printing` for related 3-D
printing processes.
