There are various ways to deposit thixotropic pastes in a more or less
controlled way; you can squeeze them out of a nozzle, RepRap-style, or
form them with a spatula like cake icing, or stamp them between dies,
or imprint their surface with dies such as Sumerian rollable clay
seals, or cut them with blades.  These techniques have been central to
human manufacturing since the Neolithic advent of pottery; clay bodies
have the desirable trait of having an extremely small elastic
deformation limit beyond which they deform plastically, permitting
fairly precise dimensional control of the result, though this is often
compromised by the grain size of tempers in the clay body and by
contraction on drying.

Often dimensional precision is compromised by adhesion to the tools
being used, but a spritz of liquid mold release or coating of solid
powder is frequently sufficient to keep this source of error
manageable.  In other cases, a layer of rapidly flowing gas or liquid,
as in an air bearing or air-hockey table, may eliminate this problem.

It occurred to me today as I was watching peaks of dulce de leche
stubbornly fail to collapse that *emulsions* like mayonnaise and dulce
de leche are generally thixotropic, as are liquid-gas foams.  I guess
the energy to deform droplets of the discontinuous phase out of
sphericity manifests as enough elasticity to render the overall
metamaterial thixotropic.

[Later I read some papers about dulce de leche rheology, and that’s
not why it’s thixotropic.  It's thixotropic because the sugars and
polysaccharides form a gel.]

If the thixotropic paste is sufficiently dimensionally stable, this is
the easiest way to realize arbitrary high-precision three-dimensional
geometry.  Often, though, the thixotropic substance itself doesn’t
have the desired properties; mayonnaise, for example, noticeably lacks
structural strength.

[Note that the above uses the wrong definition of thixotropy: I
thought thixotropy was the phenomenon where viscosity increases
instantaneously at low shear rates, but actually thixotropy is where
viscosity increases progressively over time at low shear rates, which
is a phenomenon that does happen with dulce de leche.]
