There are a variety of Unicode graphics drawing character sets,
similar to the [Large Character Microvector Set ROM from the HP 2640
series][0], which let you draw each character from a “3×3 matrix of
smaller characters”.

[0]: https://www.curiousmarc.com/computing/hp-264x-terminals

I was thinking it might be fun to abuse some of these character sets
for asciinema plotting and the like.

Unicode math character pieces
-----------------------------

These are used to build up large math symbols over several character
cells.  I don’t know where they come from but I suspect they’re in
Unicode for round-tripping compatibility.

(loop for i from #x239b to #x23b3 do (insert i))

    ⎛⎜⎝⎞⎟⎠⎡⎢⎣⎤⎥⎦⎧⎨⎩⎪⎫⎬⎭⎮⎯

You can use them like this:

    ⎛    ⎞ ⎡  ⎤ ⎧    ⎫           ⎰ ⎱ 
    ⎜⎛  ⎞⎟ ⎢  ⎥ ⎪    ⎪  ⎧        ⎱ ⎰ 
    ⎜⎜()⎟⎟ ⎣  ⎦ ⎨    ⎬  ⎮ x² dx      
    ⎜⎝  ⎠⎟      ⎪    ⎪  ⎭        ⎲   
    ⎝    ⎠      ⎩    ⎭           ⎳
 

Box drawings
------------

This is the set from U+2500 to U+257F from Videotex mosaic characters:

(loop for i from #x2500 to #x257f do (insert i))

    ─━│┃┄┅┆┇┈┉┊┋┌┍┎┏┐┑┒┓└┕┖┗┘┙┚┛├┝┞┟
    ┠┡┢┣┤┥┦┧┨┩┪┫┬┭┮┯┰┱┲┳┴┵┶┷┸┹┺┻┼┽┾┿
    ╀╁╂╃╄╅╆╇╈╉╊╋╌╍╎╏═║╒╓╔╕╖╗╘╙╚╛╜╝╞╟
    ╠╡╢╣╤╥╦╧╨╩╪╫╬╭╮╯╰╱╲╳╴╵╶╷╸╹╺╻╼╽╾╿

This contains light, heavy, and double line weights in horizontal and
vertical orientations, though not all combinations of these, plus
double, triple, and quadruple-dashed variants of light and heavy
straight lines, plus light diagonals, plus rounded corners.  With
these you can do arbitrary combinations of vertical and horizontal
lines in half-character-cell increments.  I think all the combinations
of light and heavy lines are provided; that would be 3⁴ = 81
characters, which are the ones from U+2500 to U+254B inclusive except
U+2504 to U+250B inclusive, plus the ones from U+2574 to U+257F: (+ (-
(- #x254C #x2500) (- #x250c #x2504)) (- #x2580 #x2574)) gives 80, so
either I miscounted or one is missing.  All three combinations of
diagonal lines are provided, but most of the light–double combinations
and all of the heavy–double combinations are missing.

So with these Videotex characters you can do things like this:

    ╭──────┒   ╲╳╱   ╱╲     ╔══════╗
    │      ┃          ╱╲    ╟──────╢
    ┕━━━━━━┛         ╱╲     ║      ║
                            ╚══════╝

Quadrant characters
-------------------

There’s [a 2018 “Graphics for Legacy Computing” proposal to add 64
sextant characters to Unicode starting at U+1FB00][1] compatible with
the TRS-80 “pseudopixel” or “semigraphics” set, or teletext systems
including Minitel.  But since 1991 Unicode has contained “quadrant”
characters, like the Sinclair ZX-80 and ZX-81 or the Commodore line,
with *four* pseudopixels per character cell, from U+2596 to U+259F:

(loop for i from #x2596 to #x259f do (insert i))

    ▖▗▘▙▚▛▜▝▞▟

[1]: https://www.unicode.org/L2/L2018/18235-terminals-prop.pdf

This is visibly missing the all-empty and all-full configurations (■,
which follows them, is not the all-full configuration), but normally a
space can be used with or without inverse video.

For monochrome or 2-color graphics, these characters plus inverse
video permit doubling the character grid resolution, with full color
freedom.

Eighth blocks and scan lines
----------------------------

This is the set from U+2580 to U+2590, in “Blocks” (now “Block
Elements”):

(loop for i from #x2580 to #x2590 do (insert i))

    ▀▁▂▃▄▅▆▇█▉▊▋▌▍▎▏▐

These characters allow you to divide character cells vertically or
horizontally (but not both) into two colors with a resolution of ⅛
cell.  They’re commonly used, for example, for plotting sparklines.
They are clearly designed for use with inverse video (^[[7m in ANSI).

This is particularly useful for bar plots, as provided by
[UnicodePlots.jl][5], where the blocks divided left to right can
provide 640 pixels of horizontal precision for your bars on an
80-character screen.  This includes stacked bars in which different
colors divide a bar horizontally and may include inline legends.
However, experimentation seems to show that my terminal here renders
them incorrectly, with some unfilled space above them in the character
cell:

    ▊▋▌▍▎▏▐
    ▊▋▌▍▎▏▐
    ▊▋▌▍▎▏▐

[5]: https://github.com/Evizero/UnicodePlots.jl

Similar are the “horizontal scan line” characters, of which there are
only four starting at U+23BA:

    ⎺⎻⎼⎽

These are explained in [Frank da Cruz’s proposal L2/00-159][2] as
being for round-trip compatibility with some old terminals:

      E0D6   Scan 1    DSG 06/15, H19 07/10, WG3 05/00, TVI 09/00, IBM SV300400
      E0D7   Scan 3    DSG 07/00, WYA 01/01, WG3 05/00, IBM SV300200
      E0D8   Scan 5    DSG 07/01, WYA 02/02, IBM SV300300, IBM SM920000
      E0D9   Scan 7    DSG 07/02, WYA 01/03, WG3 05/01, IBM SV300100
      E0DA   Scan 9    DSG 07/03, H19 07/11, WG3 05/01, TVI 09/01, IBM SV300600

[2]: https://www.unicode.org/L2/L2000/00159-ucsterminal.txt

They’re intended to join up with U+23B8 “⎸” and U+23B9 “⎹” to make
boxes in a similar way to the Videotex box-drawing characters above,
and there are supposed to be five of them, but this does not work in
my current font:

    ⎹⎽⎸⎹⎺⎸⎹⎻⎸⎹⎼⎸

These can be used for sparklines in a similar way to the
vertically-divided eighth blocks, but with half the resolution.
Sometimes U+2500 is considered a part of the set, but at least in the
font I’m using at the moment, it doesn’t fit:

    ⎺⎻─⎼⎽

The proposed “legacy computing” characters would augment these with,
among other things, 8-position horizontal and vertical lines.

Edge box drawing
----------------

As sort of noted above, the characters `⎹` U+23B9 and `⎺` U+23BA link
up:

    ⎹⎺⎹⎺⎹⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺
      ⎹⎺⎹⎺⎹⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺⎺

In my current font, successive rows of `⎹` don’t quite link up the way
they’re supposed to, but successive columns of `⎺` do.  From the
“eighth blocks” area we have another couple of characters (or actually
various pairs of characters) that can potentially be applied in the
same way:

    ▁▏▁▁▏▁▁▏▁▁▏
    ▁▏▁▏▁▏▁▏▁▏

These also fail to link up from one line to the next in my current
font.

The aforementioned “Graphics for Legacy Computing” proposal includes
more such characters, including four corners intended to link up with
the above “eighth blocks”:

(loop for i from #x1fb7c to #x1fb7f do (insert i))

    🭼🭽🭾🭿

In theory, with three printable characters like this plus a space, you
could lay out a grid of thin lines with the resolution of the
character grid, with the lines beginning and ending at, say, the upper
left-hand corner of each character cell.  This would be potentially
more parsimonious than the box-drawing characters we *did* get, which
can end and join at the center of each character cell, but be
interrupted at half-character-cell intervals, a relatively useless
ability.  But for this ability we need 15 graphics characters (for a
single line width) rather than 3.

Shade characters
----------------

The three “shade” characters from U+2591 to U+2593 can be used to
dither between a foreground color and a background color; really you
only need two of them if you have inverse video or full liberty in
color choice:

    ░▒▓

This doesn’t increase the resolution of your display any, though.

Braille provides the best resolution, though not without drawbacks
------------------------------------------------------------------

The Braille block from U+2800 to U+28FF offers a full selection of 256
binary patterns of 8 pixels:

(loop for i from #x2800 to #x28ff do (insert i))

    ⠀⠁⠂⠃⠄⠅⠆⠇⠈⠉⠊⠋⠌⠍⠎⠏⠐⠑⠒⠓⠔⠕⠖⠗⠘⠙⠚⠛⠜⠝⠞⠟
    ⠠⠡⠢⠣⠤⠥⠦⠧⠨⠩⠪⠫⠬⠭⠮⠯⠰⠱⠲⠳⠴⠵⠶⠷⠸⠹⠺⠻⠼⠽⠾⠿
    ⡀⡁⡂⡃⡄⡅⡆⡇⡈⡉⡊⡋⡌⡍⡎⡏⡐⡑⡒⡓⡔⡕⡖⡗⡘⡙⡚⡛⡜⡝⡞⡟
    ⡠⡡⡢⡣⡤⡥⡦⡧⡨⡩⡪⡫⡬⡭⡮⡯⡰⡱⡲⡳⡴⡵⡶⡷⡸⡹⡺⡻⡼⡽⡾⡿
    ⢀⢁⢂⢃⢄⢅⢆⢇⢈⢉⢊⢋⢌⢍⢎⢏⢐⢑⢒⢓⢔⢕⢖⢗⢘⢙⢚⢛⢜⢝⢞⢟
    ⢠⢡⢢⢣⢤⢥⢦⢧⢨⢩⢪⢫⢬⢭⢮⢯⢰⢱⢲⢳⢴⢵⢶⢷⢸⢹⢺⢻⢼⢽⢾⢿
    ⣀⣁⣂⣃⣄⣅⣆⣇⣈⣉⣊⣋⣌⣍⣎⣏⣐⣑⣒⣓⣔⣕⣖⣗⣘⣙⣚⣛⣜⣝⣞⣟
    ⣠⣡⣢⣣⣤⣥⣦⣧⣨⣩⣪⣫⣬⣭⣮⣯⣰⣱⣲⣳⣴⣵⣶⣷⣸⣹⣺⣻⣼⣽⣾⣿

At the expense of a little dottiness, background bleedthrough, and
spacing jitter, this can be used to get 8× character cell resolution
for things like plotting points and lines on a character display;
15360 pixels in a standard 80×24 terminal window.  This is better
resolution than even the proposed sextant characters, and the
pseudopixels are usually squarer.  The bit positions within the
character cell, with x increasing right and y increasing down, are (0,
0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 0), (1, 1), (1, 2), (0, 3), and (1, 3), in
that order.

For example, you can plot this circle:

⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢀⣀⡤⠤⠴⠒⠒⠒⠒⠒⠒⠢⠤⠤⣀⣀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣀⡤⠖⠋⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⠉⠓⠦⣄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢀⠴⠋⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠙⠲⣄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣠⠞⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠑⢄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢀⠞⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠑⢄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡰⠃⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⢳⡀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡼⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠱⡄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡼⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠹⡄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢰⠃⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢣⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡏⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⡆⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢰⠃⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢣⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠸⡀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣸⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡇⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⡇⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⡀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢸⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢧⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢠⠇⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⢧⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢠⠏⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⢳⡀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣠⠏⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠙⢄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢀⡴⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⠳⣄⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⢀⡴⠋⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠑⢦⣀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣠⠔⠋⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⠓⠦⣄⡀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⣀⡤⠖⠋⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠈⠙⠒⠢⠤⢤⣀⣀⣀⣀⣀⣀⣠⠤⠤⠖⠚⠉⠁⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀

(Some terminals display this suboptimally with the non-active Braille
dots also drawn, as empty circles.)

I did that with this simple Python program:

    from __future__ import division, print_function
    import sys


    bitpos = [(0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 0), (1, 1), (1, 2), (0, 3), (1, 3)]

    try:
        unichr
    except NameError:
        unichr = chr


    class Canvas:
        def __init__(self, text_cols, text_rows):
            assert text_rows > 0
            self.pixels = [[0 for x in range(text_cols * 2)]
                           for y in range(text_rows * 4)]

        def pixelsize(self):
            return len(self.pixels[0]), len(self.pixels)

        def pset(self, x, y):
            try:
                self.pixels[y][x] = 1
            except IndexError:
                pass                # clip silently

        def render(self):
            p = self.pixels
            ww, hh = self.pixelsize()
            return '\n'.join(''.join(
                    unichr(0x2800 + sum(1 << i if p[y+by][x+bx] else 0
                                        for i, (bx, by) in enumerate(bitpos)))
                    for x in range(0, ww, 2)
                    ) for y in range(0, hh, 4))

        def write(self, fileobj):
            fileobj.write(self.render() + '\n')


    def draw_circle(canvas):
        ww, hh = canvas.pixelsize()
        mindim = min(ww, hh)
        cx, cy = ww/2, hh/2
        r = mindim/2 - 1
        x, y = r, 0
        for i in range(1000):
            canvas.pset(int(round(x + cx)), int(round(y + cy)))
            x -= y * .01
            y += x * .01

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        import cgitb; cgitb.enable(format='text')
        canvas = Canvas(80, 24)
        draw_circle(canvas)
        canvas.write(sys.stdout)

Triangle characters
-------------------

These probably are *not* useful as mosaic characters like the ones in
the “Graphics for Legacy Computing” item above; faced with the choice
between making them mate properly for mosaicing and giving them 45°
angles, font designers have typically chosen the latter:

    ◢◣
    ◥◤

