Vermiculite is readily available at plant nurseries and garden stores,
and withstands temperatures up to 1150°.  But it comes as an aggregate
of fragile, loose particles; to make a solid object out of it you need
to stick them together somehow.  The standard approach is to use
sodium silicate, but I don’t have any.

Some adhesives are only activated by heat, and those would need a
low-temperature adhesive to give the “green body” enough “green
strength” to survive until firing.  For many uses of vermiculite, much
of the body would never reach a high enough temperature to activate
it.

The most obvious such “adhesive” would of course be a hydrated clay,
but low-temperature clays might slump too much at temperature.

Glassy carbon might be a useful, though weak, adhesive for this
purpose; it won’t flux the vermiculite, won’t melt up to much higher
temperatures, and can be easily made from sugar.  You could tumble
damp vermiculite particles in powdered sugar, or spray sugar water
onto tumbling vermiculite, so that each particle is coated without
penetrating much into its interior.  Heat caramelizes the sugar into
glassy carbon, hopefully without expanding the aggregate much.  The
sugar itself can serve as the initial adhesive if enough humidity is
available and it is prevented from crystallizing.  The greatest
drawback of glassy carbon is that in an oxidizing atmosphere it erodes
rapidly.

Superficial borax might also work: a thin coating of dissolved borax
(31.7 g/ℓ) can dry and crystallize, providing green strength; upon
heating, it will produce anhydrous borax at 75° and then boric-acid
glass.  This should eventually diffuse into the phyllosilicate
vermiculite grains and eliminate the low-melting phase.

Soluble sodium donors also seem promising to apply in the same way:
sodium hydroxide, carbonate, or bicarbonate on the surfaces of the
grains should enable them to sinter together by forming a small amount
of sodium silicate in situ.  Trisodium phosphate might also work,
perhaps forming silicon aluminum phosphates, though its aqueous
solution might attack the vermiculite even at room temperature.
Phosphates in general may be a useful way to increase the temperature
the final mixture can handle, counteracting the fluxing effects of
additives like boria and soda.

The most accessible alkali donor is probably wood ash, with its
mixture of oxides and carbonates of sodium and potassium, which
potters sometimes use for ash glazing.

(Some sodium hydroxide is currently crackling across the room from me
as it releases its water of hydration in a pile of vermiculite on top
of an electric burner; the temperature of the burner is plenty hot
enough to completely melt it, but the vermiculite is slowing the
process.  Probably a more finely divided form, or a spray coating on
the vermiculite granules, would have been better; both the vermiculite
grains and the NaOH grains are about 3 mm.)

(The final result of that experiment: the sodium hydroxide apparently
simply disappeared, leaving the vermiculite loose and not visibly
changed.)

See also file `more-cements.md` for more notes on mineral cements that
might be applicable.